<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8" ?>

<!DOCTYPE TEI.2 SYSTEM "http://www.gutenberg.org/tei/marcello/0.4/dtd/pgtei.dtd" [

<!ENTITY u5  "http://www.tei-c.org/Lite/">

]>

<TEI.2 lang="en">
<teiHeader>
  <fileDesc>
    <titleStmt>
      <title>The Freedom of Science</title>
      <author><name reg="Donat, Joseph">Joseph Donat</name></author>
    </titleStmt>
    <editionStmt>
      <edition n="1">Edition 1</edition>
    </editionStmt>
    <publicationStmt>
      <publisher>Project Gutenberg</publisher>
      <date>July 26, 2012</date>
      <idno type="etext-no">40342</idno>
      <availability>
        <p>This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and
        with almost no restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it
        away or re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg
        License online at www.gutenberg.org/license</p>
      </availability>
    </publicationStmt>
    <sourceDesc>
      <bibl>
        Created electronically.
      </bibl>
    </sourceDesc>
  </fileDesc>
  <encodingDesc>
  </encodingDesc>
  <profileDesc>
    <langUsage>
      <language id="en"></language>
      <language id="de"></language>
      <language id="la"></language>
      <language id="fr"></language>
      <language id="it"></language>
    </langUsage>
  </profileDesc>
  <revisionDesc>
    <change>
      <date value="2012-07-26">July 26, 2012</date>
      <respStmt>
        <name>
            Produced by Dianna Adair, David King, and the Online
            Distributed Proofreading Team at &lt;http://www.pgdp.net/&gt;.
            (This file was produced from images generously
            made available by The Internet Archive/Canadian Libraries.)
        </name>
      </respStmt>
      <item>Project Gutenberg TEI edition 1</item>
    </change>
  </revisionDesc>
</teiHeader>

<pgExtensions>
  <pgStyleSheet>
    .boxed           { x-class: boxed }
    .shaded          { x-class: shaded }
    .rules           { x-class: rules; rules: all }
    .indent          { margin-left: 2 }
    .bold            { font-weight: bold }
    .italic          { font-style: italic }
    .smallcaps       { font-variant: small-caps }
  </pgStyleSheet>

  <pgCharMap formats="txt.iso-8859-1">
    <char id="U0x2014">
      <charName>mdash</charName>
      <desc>EM DASH</desc>
      <mapping>--</mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2003">
      <charName>emsp</charName>
      <desc>EM SPACE</desc>
      <mapping>  </mapping>
    </char>
    <char id="U0x2026">
      <charName>hellip</charName>
      <desc>HORIZONTAL ELLIPSIS</desc>
      <mapping>...</mapping>
    </char>
  </pgCharMap>
</pgExtensions>

<text lang="en">
  <front>
    <div>
      <divGen type="pgheader" />
    </div>
    <div>
      <divGen type="encodingDesc" />
    </div>

    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <p rend="font-size: xx-large; text-align: center">The Freedom of Science</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">By</p>
      <p rend="font-size: x-large; text-align: center">Joseph Donat, S.J., D.D.</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Professor Innsbruck University</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">New York</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">Joseph F. Wagner</p>
      <p rend="text-align: center">1914</p>
    </div>
    <div rend="page-break-before: always">
      <head>Contents</head>
      <divGen type="toc" />
    </div>

  </front>
<body>

<pb n='i'/><anchor id='Pgi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Imprimatur.</head>

<lg>
<l>Nihil Obstat</l>
<l>REMIGIUS LAFORT, D.D.</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Censor</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Imprimatur</l>
<l>JOHN CARDINAL FARLEY</l>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Archbishop of New York</hi></l>
</lg>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>New York</hi>, January 22, 1914.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='smallcaps'>Copyright, 1914, by Joseph F. Wagner, New York</hi>
</p>

</div>

<pb n='iii'/><anchor id='Pgiii'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Author's Preface To The English
Edition.</head>

<p>
The present work has already secured many friends in
German Europe. An invitation has now been extended
for its reception among the English-speaking countries, with
the object that there, too, it may seek readers and friends, and
communicate to them its thoughts&mdash;the ideas it has to convey
and to interpret. While wishing it heartfelt success and good
fortune on its journey, the Author desires it to convey his
greetings to its new readers.
</p>

<p>
This book has issued from the throes of dissension and strife,
seeing the light at a time when, in Austria and Germany, the
bitter forces of opposition, that range themselves about the
shibboleth <emph>Freedom of Science</emph>, were seen engaging in a combat
of fiercer intensity than ever. Yet, notwithstanding, this Child
of Strife has learned the language of Peace only. It speaks
the language of an impartial objectivity which endeavours, in
a spirit of unimpassioned, though earnest, calm, to range itself
over the burning questions of the day&mdash;over those great <foreign lang='de' rend='italic'>Weltanschauung</foreign>
questions, that stand in such close relation with the
compendious motto: <emph>Freedom of Science</emph>. Yes, <emph>Freedom</emph> and
<emph>Science</emph> serve, in our age and on both sides of the Atlantic, as
trumpet-calls, to summon together&mdash;often indeed to pit in
deadly combat&mdash;the rival forces of opposition. They are catch-words
that tend to hold at fever-pitch the intellectual life of
modern civilization&mdash;agents as they are of such mighty and
far-reaching influences. On the one hand, Science, whence the
moving and leading ideas of the time take shape and form to
go forth in turn and subject to their sway the intellect of man;
on the other, Freedom&mdash;that Freedom of sovereign emancipation,
<pb n='iv'/><anchor id='Pgiv'/>
that Christian Freedom of well-ordered self-development,
which determine the actions, the strivings of the human spirit,
even as they control imperceptibly the march of Science. While
the present volume is connected with this chain of profound
problems, it becomes, of itself, a representation of the intellectual
life of our day, with its far-reaching philosophical questions,
its forces of struggle and opposition, its dangers, and
deep-seated evils.
</p>

<p>
The Author has a lively recollection of an expression which
he heard a few years ago, in a conversation with an American
professor, then journeying in Europe. <q>Here, they talk of
tolerance,</q> he observed, <q>while in America we put it into practice.</q>
The catch-word <emph>Freedom of Science</emph> will not, therefore,
in <emph>every</emph> quarter of the world, serve as a call to arms, causing
the opposing columns to engage in mutual conflict, as is the
case in many portions of Europe. But certain it is that everywhere
alike&mdash;in the new world of America, as well as in the
old world of Europe&mdash;the human spirit has its attention engaged
with the same identical questions&mdash;those topics of nerve-straining
interest that sway and surge about this same catch-word
like so many opposing forces. Everywhere we shall have
those tense oppositions between sovereign Humanity and Christianity,
between Knowledge and Faith, between Law and Freedom;
everywhere those questions on the Rights and Obligations
of Science, on Catholic Thought, and on Catholic Doctrinal
Beliefs and Duties.
</p>

<p>
May it fall to the lot of this book to be able to communicate
to many a reader, interested in such topics, words of enlightenment
and explanation&mdash;to some for the strengthening of their
convictions, to others for the correction, perhaps, of their erroneous
views. At home, while winning the sympathy of many
readers, it has not failed to encounter also antagonism. This
was to be expected. The resolute championing of the principles
of the Christian view of the world, as well as many a candid
expression of views touching the intellectual impoverishment
and the ever-shifting position of unshackled Freethinking, must
necessarily arouse such antagonism. May the present volume
<pb n='v'/><anchor id='Pgv'/>
meet on the other side of the Atlantic with a large share of that
tolerance which is put into actual practice there, and is there
not merely an empty phrase on the lips of men! May it contribute
something to the better and fuller understanding of
the saying of that great English scientist, <hi rend='smallcaps'>William Thomson</hi>:
<q>Do not be afraid of being free-thinkers! If you think strongly
enough, you will be forced by science to the belief in God,
which is the foundation of all religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
Finally, I may be allowed to express my sincere thanks to the
publisher for undertaking the work of this translation.
</p>

<p>
May it accomplish much good.
</p>

<p>
J. Donat.
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>University Innsbruck,</hi></l>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Christmas, 1913.</hi></l>
</lg>

</div>

<pb n='vi'/><anchor id='Pgvi'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Translator's Note.</head>

<p>
The German original is replete with references to works
especially in the German language, the author having with
great care quoted title and page whenever referring to an
author. Since many of these references are of value only to
those familiar with the German, they have been abbreviated
or omitted in this English version, whenever they would seem
to needlessly encumber its pages.
</p>

<p>
Those desirous of verifying quotations will be enabled to do
so in all instances by a reference to the German original.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='001'/><anchor id='Pg001'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>First Section. The Freedom of Science and its
Philosophical Basis.</head>

<pb n='003'/><anchor id='Pg003'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Science And Freedom.</head>

<p>
If a question is destined to agitate and divide for considerable
length of time the minds of men, it must undoubtedly have
its root deep in the entire intellectual life of the times; it must
be anchored in profound philosophical thought, in theories of
life. From this source it derives its power of captivating the
minds. All this applies to the question of the Freedom of Science.
If, then, we desire a thorough understanding of this question,
we must first of all seek and examine its deeper lying
philosophical basis; we must trace the threads which so closely
unite it to the intellectual life and effort of the times.
</p>

<p>
But before we begin our study, let us remember a rule of the
great orator and philosopher of ancient Rome; a rule only too
often forgotten in our times: <q>Every philosophical discussion,
of anything whatsoever, should begin with a definition, in order
to make clear what the discussion is about</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, De Officiis,
I, 2). If we would form a judgment as to the demand of science
for freedom, as to the justification of this demand, as to its
compatibility or incompatibility with the duty of faith, the first
question that naturally arises is: What is the purport of this
demand, what does it mean? Only after we have clearly circumscribed
this demand can we approach its philosophical presumptions
and test its basis.
</p>

<p>
What, then, do we understand by Science, and what freedom
may be granted to it?
</p>

<div>
<head>Science.</head>

<p>
When a man of Northern or Central Europe hears of science,
his thoughts generally turn to the universities and their teachers.
<pb n='004'/><anchor id='Pg004'/>
To him the university is the home of science, there its numerous
branches dwell in good fellowship, there hundreds of men have
consecrated themselves to its service. In those parts of Europe
it is customary for men of science to be university professors.
Of what university is he? is asked. Celebrated scientists, like
<hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Liebig</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hertz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kirchhoff</hi>; philosophers, like <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Schelling</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Herbart</hi>; great philologists, historians,
and so on, were university professors.
</p>

<p>
For all that, <emph>science</emph> and <emph>university</emph> are not necessarily
inseparable things. The university needs science, but science
does not absolutely need the university. Science was in the
world before the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the time when
France and Italy built their first universities; and also since
then science has been enriched by the achievements of many a
genius who never occupied a university chair. <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> belonged to no universities; <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> never taught in the higher schools. In the
countries of Western Europe and America the man of science
and the university professor are to this day not so much identical
in person. Therefore, if the freedom of science applies
<emph>principally</emph> to the higher schools and their teachers, this is
not its exclusive application. Science and university are not
identical terms.
</p>

<p>
What, then, is science?
</p>

<p>
At the sound of this magic word there arises in the minds of
many the image of a superhuman being: open on his lap lies
the book of wisdom in which all mysteries are solved; in his
hand is the flaming torch which enlightens the path down into
the lowest depths of research, dispelling all darkness. This, in
the minds of many, is what science means. The mere appeal to
this infallible being suffices to settle all problems, to silence
every contradiction; woe to him who dares open his profane
mouth to utter an If or a But!
</p>

<p>
Were this science, there would be no dispute. We should
have to admit that there could be no limit set to the freedom
of this being; he must share the privileges of divine Intelligence,
for no command to keep silent can be imposed on Infallible
Truth; there can be no amendment. But, alas! in the world
<pb n='005'/><anchor id='Pg005'/>
of reality this personified Science is nowhere to be found, it
exists solely in the realm of rhetoric and poetry. Science, as it
exists among men, has its seat, after all, nowhere else than in
the human mind. It is, indeed, nothing else but <emph>the well-ordered
summary of knowledge and of the research for
the causes of things</emph>. Natural science is the summary of
knowledge and research in the realm of natural phenomena,
arranged in an orderly way, as a text-book will give it; that is,
an investigation of phenomena and their causes. A mere description
of natural phenomena, without any explanation, or
reference of them to the laws of nature, would indeed be teaching
about nature, but not natural science. Similarly, the science
of history is the well-ordered summary of knowledge and
research in the domain of human events, derived from their
sources, with the statement of facts according to cause and
effect.
</p>

<p>
And not all this knowledge is certain, and free from doubt.
The modern conception of science, as we now have it&mdash;the
ancients had a much narrower conception&mdash;includes certain
as well as uncertain knowledge, results and hypotheses, and even
the activity of research, together with its methods. Astronomy
was thus in <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy's</hi> time the summary of what was then
known with more or less certainty about the stars; included in
this, as is well known, was the opinion that the sun circles
around the earth. And the philosophy of <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> embraced his
philosophical ideas about God, the world and man; hence many
errors. Further, when speaking of science in general, we mean
the whole number of the individual sciences. It is the freedom
of science in this sense that we have to investigate here. The
individual sciences are distinguished one from another principally
by the subjects of which they treat. Astronomy is distinguished
from palæontology and philosophy by the fact that it
treats of the stars, not of fossils, or of the fundamental truths
of reason.
</p>

<p>
From this brief analysis of concepts it is clear that science
and scientific research are not superhuman beings, but an activity
or condition of the human mind, distinguished from the ordinary
thought of the individual only by system and method, and,
<pb n='006'/><anchor id='Pg006'/>
commonly, by greater thoroughness and by the united effort of
many. <emph>It is subject to all the limitations of the human
mind.</emph>
</p>

<p>
What follows from this? Two things. Let us at once make
a brief reference to both of them, because in our discussion they
are of the greatest importance.
</p>

<p>
Since, then, science is an activity of the human mind, it must,
like it, always and everywhere be <emph>subject to the Truth</emph> and
<emph>subject to God</emph>. Subject to the Truth: whenever science
comes in contact with it, it must reverently bow to the truth.
And subject to God: if God is the Creator of man and of his
spiritual and bodily activity, He is also the master of his whole
being, and man is subject to Him in all his activity and development,
therefore in his intellectual life, and in his artistic and
scientific pursuits. Everything is and remains the activity of
the <emph>creature</emph>. As gravitation rules the entire planet and its
material activity, attracts it towards the sun and makes it circle
around it, so does the law of dependence on God rule the
whole life of the creature. Man cannot therefore, even in his
scientific research, ignore his Creator, cannot emancipate himself
from His authority; and if God has given a revelation and demands
faith, the man of science, too, must believe. There cannot
be an emancipated, free, science in this sense.
</p>

<p>
Another consequence is this: since science is an activity of
the human mind, it shares all its <emph>imperfections and weaknesses</emph>.
It is truly flesh of its flesh. The fruit cannot be
more perfect than the tree that produces it, nor the flower better
than the plant on which it blossomed. Now, as the human
mind is throughout limited in its nature, so is it also in its research.
It is not given to man to soar aloft on eagle wings
to the heights of knowledge, thence to gaze upon truth with
unerring intuition; the ascent must be slow, with constant
dangers of stumbling, even of falling headlong. To these
dangers must be added his latent likes and dislikes, which imperceptibly
guide his thought, especially in forming opinions
on questions of the world and of life, which the human heart
cannot view with indifference: they influence his thought.
Hence ignorance, darkness, and error, everywhere accompany the
<pb n='007'/><anchor id='Pg007'/>
investigator individually, and science as a whole, all the more
the loftier the questions that present themselves.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Already the philosopher of the dim past gave expression to the complaint,
that our reason is no more capable of knowing the divine than
the eyes of the owl are of seeing in broad daylight. It is <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> who
so complains. And the great <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, in the evening of his life, thus
estimates the worth of his knowledge: <q>What the world may think
about my labour, I do not know; I feel like a child that plays on the
strand of the sea: now and then I may perhaps find a pebble or shell
more beautiful than those of my playmates, while the boundless ocean
lies ever before me with its undiscovered treasures</q> (apud <hi rend='italic'>O. Zoeckler</hi>,
Gottes Zeugen im Reich der Natur (1906), 173). The same sorrowful
plaint is heard from all serious investigators, especially those in the
domain of the natural sciences, who should have more reason than others
to be proud of their achievements. <q>However great the amount of
human knowledge may seem to the multitude,</q> writes the well-known
chemist <hi rend='italic'>Schoenbein</hi>, <q>the most experienced scientist feels the incompleteness
and patchwork of it, and realizes that man so far has been able to
learn but infinitely little of what nature is, and of what can be known.</q>
<q>The more exact the investigation,</q> says the geologist <hi rend='italic'>Quenstedt</hi>, <q>so
much the more obscure is its beginning. Indeed, the deeper we think
to have understood the single parts, the further the original plan of
the Creator seems to escape us</q> (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Kneller</hi>, Das Christentum und
die Vertreter der neueren Naturwissenschaften (1904), 208, 281).
<q>Although science,</q> so we are assured by another modern savant,
<q>has brought to light many a treasure, still, compared with what we
do not yet know, it is as a drop to the ocean. In all our knowledge there
will always be the danger of error.</q> We are probably not very far in
advance of the time of <hi rend='italic'>Albrecht von Haller</hi>, who said: <q>We, all of us,
err, only each errs in a different way. Every passage that has been illuminated
by science is surrounded by dense darkness; beyond the visible
lies the invisible.</q> And Prof. <hi rend='italic'>J. Reinke</hi> continues: <q>As early as the
day of <hi rend='italic'>Socrates</hi>, the beginning of philosophy was to know that we know
nothing; the end of philosophy, to know that we must believe: such is
the inevitable fate of human wisdom</q> (Naturwissenschaft und Religion,
in Natur und Kultur IV (1907), 418, 425. Printed also separately).
Some years ago Sir <hi rend='italic'>W. Ramsay</hi>, a noted scientist, concluded a
discourse on his scientific labour with the words: <q>When a man has
reached the middle of his life, he begins to believe that the longer he
lives the less he knows! This is my excuse for having molested you
for an hour with my ignorance</q> (Einige Betrachtungen ueber das
periodische Gesetz der Elemente. Vortrag auf der 75. Versammlung
Deutscher Naturforscher und Ærzte zu Cassel (1903)).
</p>

<p>
If science, then, can only with difficulty lift from visible nature the
veils that hide the truth&mdash;and even this is often beyond its power&mdash;no
wonder it is confronted with still greater obstacles when it approaches
the truths that are beyond visible nature. Moreover, it is an old truth
that here it is led not by reason only, but also, and even more energetically,
<pb n='008'/><anchor id='Pg008'/>
by self-interest. <q>Most men,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, <q>are swayed in
their judgments by either love or hatred, likes or dislikes</q> (De Oratore,
II, 42).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
If this is the nature of human science, its adepts would be
badly deceiving themselves, if, in the pride of learning, they
would reject every correction, even proudly pushing aside the
hand of God that reaches down into the darkness of man's intellectual
life to offer its guidance. He who realizes that he is in
danger of losing his way in the dark, will not reject a reliable
guide; and he who fears to stumble will not refuse a helping
hand. Self-knowledge is the sister of wisdom, and the mother
of modesty.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Freedom.</head>

<p>
Such, then, is science: not the goddess that emanated from
the head of immortal Jove, but the offspring of the puny mind
of man, bone of his bone and flesh of his flesh. And this science
cries for freedom. It would be free and act freely; it urges its
claim in the name of truth, which must not be slighted; in
the name of the progress of civilization, which must not be
hindered.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Freedom</emph> clearly means nothing less than to be untrammeled
and free from restraint, from fetter and check, in action,
thought, and desire. The prisoner is free when his chains drop
off, a people is free when it has cast off the yoke of serfdom, the
eagle is free and can spread out its wings in lofty flight when not
bound down to the earth. Science, therefore, should be free in
its activity from bond, fetter, and restraint. Does this mean
it must be free from <emph>all</emph> restraint and law? Should the historian
be given the right to make <hi rend='italic'>Solon</hi> a member of the French
Academy, or of the heroes of Troy mediæval knights? Should
the scientist be given the right to break every rule of logic, to
ignore all progress, and perhaps in his capriciousness return to
the four elements of <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, or the astronomical chart of primitive
ages? Nobody demands this. No, science must be bound
by the <emph>truth</emph>. Freedom indeed should not mean lawlessness.
Science remains bound by the general laws of logic, and by
positive facts. Truth is the irremovable barrier set in restraint
<pb n='009'/><anchor id='Pg009'/>
of the freedom of everything, even of scientific thought.
The freedom of science therefore can only be freedom from
<emph>unreasonable</emph> restraint and fetters; from such that hinder
it unreasonably in its inquiry after the truth, and in the communication
of the results of its investigation. <emph>It should be
free, not from the internal bondage of truth, but from
the restraint by external authority</emph>, the restraint which
would hinder it, in an <emph>improper way</emph>, from approaching those
questions, and using those methods, that lead to the discovery
of truth, and from acknowledging the results it has found to
be true; or which would unlawfully keep it from making
known, for the benefit of others, the results of its investigation.
It should be free from any unjust restriction, imposed by state
or Church, by popular opinion, by party spirit, by hampering
protectorate, or servility of any kind.
</p>

<p>
From any <emph>unjust</emph> restriction, we said. For this is clear: if
under certain circumstances there might be warrant for a <emph>just</emph>
restriction by external authority, such a restriction could not be
refused in the name of freedom. So long, then, as we understand
by freedom a <emph>lawful</emph> freedom, there cannot be included
in this the freedom from <emph>every</emph> external authority, but only
from <emph>unlawful</emph> interference. There is, then, the question
whether there may be a legitimate restraint, imposed by external
authority, which man must not evade, and what the nature of
such restraint may be.
</p>

<p>
We must, moreover, take into consideration two elements,
which are distinguished in the above definitions, both belonging
to the modern idea of scientific freedom. We will call them
<emph>freedom of research</emph>, and <emph>freedom of teaching</emph>. The investigator
and the scientist claim the one; the teacher, the other.
Searching after truth, and communicating the truth found, are,
as is known, the principal occupations of science. The scientist
should first of all be an investigator. He should not be
content to appropriate to himself the knowledge of others, he
should also make his own additions to knowledge. He is also
commonly a teacher, by word of mouth, as at the university,
or by his writing, in his literary activity. Research, as such,
imparts directly a certain knowledge only to the investigator;
<pb n='010'/><anchor id='Pg010'/>
it is of a private nature and as such does not reach beyond
him. But by teaching, his ideas are communicated to others,
and then begin to influence their thought, will, and action, often
very strongly. Teaching is a social factor; with it are bound
up the weal and woe of others. Suppose a man of influence
conceives in his study the idea that monogamy is an infringement
upon the universal rights of man; should he be
given without any ado the right of disseminating, by teaching,
the imagined results of his investigation, to the confusion of
men, and with serious danger to the peace of society?
</p>

<p>
We shall therefore have to distinguish between freedom of research
and freedom of teaching. The neglect of this distinction
causes not a little confusion; thus, if one complains of
his convictions being trammeled or his liberty of conscience
being violated, when he is hindered from immediately proclaiming
whatever he calls his convictions. Private opinion, and the
public propaganda of this opinion, are evidently very different
things. It may be that an opinion seems to me the right one,
but, in spite of that, public dissemination of it may, always
or under certain circumstances, mean danger to my fellow-men.
If I am for this reason prevented from publishing it, I am
not thereby hindered from giving it my own private assent. It
is, moreover, quite clear that the state&mdash;we disregard here religious
authority&mdash;cannot at all directly restrict research, which
is something personal. It can only impose restrictions on the
communication of one's ideas by teaching them to others, which
is a social function.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
From these few remarks will be followed the impropriety of the
following, or similar, observations: <q>The fostering of science and its
teaching are not separate functions ... to insinuate a twofold function
of freedom, viz., that of the savant and that of the teacher, would be to
dissolve the unity of the moral personality</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. Kahl</hi>, Bekenntnissgebundenheit
und Lehrfreiheit (1897), 22). It is not at all double-dealing
if some one does not publicly proclaim one's private knowledge. Is it
double-dealing, is it a violation of <q>the unity of the moral personality,</q>
if one is, and must be, silent about official secrets? And if one does not
tell, and is not allowed to tell, official secrets, if one prevents an anarchist
from spreading his revolutionary ideas, is this a violation of the
unity of the moral personality? It is true that <q>to deny one's convictions
is a violation of one of the most indubitable principles of moral
<pb n='011'/><anchor id='Pg011'/>
conduct</q> (<hi rend='italic'>K. v. Amira</hi>, Die Stellung des akademischen Lehrers zur
Freiheit in Forschung und Lehre. Beilage der Muenchener Neuesten
Nachrichten. 9. Juli, 1908). But it is logically incorrect to conclude
therefrom that the freedom of teaching should not be restricted. To
keep silence is not denying one's convictions. Later on, when speaking
of freedom in teaching, we shall return to this thought and deal with
it more thoroughly.
</quote>

<p>
So far there can be no serious diversity of opinion. Freedom
from unjust restraint is demanded, and rightly demanded, for
science. The very object of science requires it. In scientific
research man's power of discernment should freely develop;
his inclination towards truth should exert itself; and by communication
of acquired knowledge mankind should advance in
mental and material culture.
</p>

<p>
The bud bursts forth and freely unfolds its splendour; the
butterfly grows unhindered in beauty; the tree, too, wants freedom,
in order to develop its boughs and branches according to
its nature, and if you try to bind and tie it, it resists as much
as it can. Just so is freedom needful for the development
of the noblest aspirations of human nature, for its progress
in knowledge. Every friend of humanity, every one who loves
his own kind, must be in sympathy with its progress. Who
will not rejoice to see the mind of man happily trace the
laws of nature, laid down by the Spirit of God in the stillness
of eternity when as yet there was no creature to heed, the laws
He then placed in nature in order that the reasonable creature
might discern the marks of his Creator? Who would not rejoice
to see man, diligently following the facts of history and studying
the works of literature and art, find therein the ideas of
God reflected, as the rays of the sun in the trembling drop of
dew, and, finally, trying to solve the difficult problems of life?
To this end has the Creator enkindled in the mind of man a
spark of His own intelligence; to this end has He put in him a
desire to inquire and learn, a desire which has exerted itself
most in the noblest of men. Man is destined to find his ultimate
gratification in beholding the Eternal Truth and Beauty, a
vision which will be the completion of human science and culture,
the highest perfection of created life. Thus man's noble
desire for knowledge and truth must develop, it must be able to
<pb n='012'/><anchor id='Pg012'/>
produce leaves and blossoms. For this he needs freedom, free
air, and free light.
</p>

<p>
If science is to attain its high purpose, it must have freedom
also to impart the knowledge acquired. It should indeed further
the progress of mankind. By its discovery it should enhance
the beauty of human life, should enrich the treasure of human
knowledge, should promote education and morality, to the honour
of the Creator. For this end, too, freedom is necessary: freedom
to impart newly acquired knowledge, else there would be
no pleasure in work, stagnation rather than progress.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='013'/><anchor id='Pg013'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Two Views Of The World And Their Freedom.</head>

<p>
There can, then, be no difference of opinion on this matter
among sober-minded men: science must be free from all
unjust hindrances and restraint. But we have not yet finished.
We have not even proceeded very far on our way. The further
question at once presents itself: Which are those unjust hindrances
and restraints that scientific research and teaching may
reject? May there not perhaps be such which it must respect?
There is little meaning in the cry: Freedom! Freedom! This
attractive word, which always finds an enthusiastic echo in man,
may easily prove a misleading catchword, and become a dangerous
weapon of the thoughtless and the unscrupulous.
</p>

<p>
The question is not, whether our science, or, to speak more
generally, our intellectual life, must be free&mdash;of that there can
be no doubt. No life can spring up and thrive without due freedom.
The question is: <emph>What sort of freedom?</emph> how can it
be more precisely defined? We all, indeed, demand freedom
for the citizen; but what kind of freedom? He should be
free from the fetters of tyranny and despotism. Do we also
demand that he be free from the laws of the state? By no
means! On the contrary, he must be subject to these, for
the very reason that he is a citizen and not the inhabitant of an
uncivilized world. We demand freedom for the artist; he
should not be bound by the tyranny of fashion. Do we also demand
that he be exempt from the laws of beauty and art? Not
at all. He must subject himself to these if he means to be an
artist and not a quack. That would not be true freedom, but
lawlessness and license, the privilege of barbarism. Freedom
therefore is a very ambiguous word.
</p>

<p>
There are <emph>two kinds of freedom</emph>, <emph>lawful</emph> and <emph>unlawful</emph>:
the latter is freedom from just laws, the former from unjust
laws.
</p>

<pb n='014'/><anchor id='Pg014'/>

<p>
We ask again, what is that lawful freedom which man
may claim for his scientific activity? In other words, what
are the restraints which he may reject as unjust, and as enslaving
the mind?&mdash;Here the ways part. Here, too, our question goes
deeper, and touches something which moves men's minds very
powerfully. Two different views of the world, two opposite
conceptions of man and his thought, come here in collision.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Christian View of the World and its Freedom.</head>

<p>
On the one hand there is the Christian view of the world:
it is essentially also the one which appears self-evident to every
unbiassed mind. In this view man is a <emph>creature, limited in
every way, therefore in many ways dependent upon</emph>
external rules, forces, and authorities. To God alone is it reserved
to be infinite, and, therefore, to possess in Himself all perfection,
goodness, and truth; for which reason there is nothing
above Him on which He could be dependent. This is not the case
with man. As a creature man is subject to his Creator. The latter
is master over man's life and therefore at the same time its
ultimate aim. For this reason religion is of obligation to man,
that is, he must honour God as He demands it; if God requires
faith in a revelation, if He established a Church and duly authorized
it to guide us, we must submit to it. In the same
way the intellect of man is bound by the laws of objective truth,
which is not of his making, but presents itself to him as a norm:
he must always be subject to it whether he wishes or not. Man
is, finally, a factor in social life; he lives in the family, state,
and Church, in the great society of mankind; upon them he is
dependent for his education and development. And society requires
that man be subject to a ruling authority, that in many
things his own interests be subordinated to the welfare of the
community.
</p>

<p>
This is the order that God has established and wishes observed.
Hence all human authority is a participation in God's supreme
government. Thus it comes about that limits may be set to the
scientist's free expression of his views, if the interest of the community
require it.
</p>

<pb n='015'/><anchor id='Pg015'/>

<p>
Man is, nevertheless, free. But his freedom does not mean
complete independence; nor freedom from all restraint, but
only from those external restraints which are opposed to his
nature and position, which hinder his legitimate development and
activity. He possesses freedom, but only such a freedom as is
his due, by which he can unfold and develop his physical and
mental powers. To keep his place of subordination to, and dependence
on, these higher authorities and powers of truth and
order, tends not to injure but to improve his being, not to dwarf
but to develop his personality; for they are sources of life to
him, they impart to his existence order and harmony, they raise
him above himself and his own littleness, they free him from
the prison of his own narrowness and selfishness, from the
chains of his unruly desires. If a man emancipates himself
from these bonds, which he ought to bear, he has freedom
of course, but an unnatural freedom, which will be harmful and
perhaps ruinous to him.
</p>

<p>
Take the tree, for instance. It should have freedom for its
natural growth. If you force it to creep along the ground
instead of growing upward, if you deny it air and light, you
infringe on the freedom it should have. Still it cannot have absolute
freedom, for it is dependent on the ground from which it derives
its nourishment, dependent on the laws of light and atmosphere
and gravitation, on the laws of season; it must adapt
itself to climate and soil. It may not say to the light: Away
with you!&mdash;a stunted growth and deformity would be the
result of such emancipation. It may not say to the ground:
Away with you!&mdash;a sad but quick death would be its fate. It
has its freedom, and in this freedom it grows and thrives. If
it desires greater freedom, it would be an unnatural one, and it
would tend, not to its development, but to its destruction.
</p>

<p>
Such is the Christian view of man and his thought. Here,
then, there is but one question to solve: Are the external restraints
imposed on me in my investigation and teaching
against my nature; against the right of my mind to truth;
against my position in human society? If so, then I reject
them, because they mean serfdom, not duty; unjust bonds,
not natural restraint. But if not, then I do not refuse them
<pb n='016'/><anchor id='Pg016'/>
my submission. Freedom I want, but only the freedom of
man.
</p>

<p>
Here we pause. Suffice it at present to have formulated the
question; we shall return to this topic later and discuss it at
greater length.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Modern Idea of Freedom.</head>

<p>
The Christian view of man and his freedom, which to past
ages appeared self-evident, has grown obscure to many minds,
and given place to another, a more modern view.<note place='foot'>Whenever we use here the word <q>modern,</q> we do not take it in
the sense of <q>present,</q>&mdash;the Christian view of the world is also a
present one, and is still of the utmost importance,&mdash;but in the sense
of <q>new</q> in contrast to the time-honoured and inherited.</note>
</p>

<p>
For the modern man, freedom, especially freedom of intellectual
life, means <emph>independence from external ties, from
all authority</emph>, or, to express it positively, absolute right of self-determination,
<emph>autonomy</emph>. He does not recognize any law or
rule which he has not imposed upon himself. In civil life, of
course, it is a principle that man must submit to external, legal
restraint in many things that do not directly concern his own
person, but only so far as is necessary in order that others,
too, may enjoy the same freedom; but also here every citizen
must be able to share in the legislation, according to the rules
of constitutional or republican government. But he must be
free from every external restraint in whatever touches the core
of his personality, his feeling, desire, thought, and the expression
of his thought.
</p>

<p>
It should now be clear, from what has been said, what is
meant by <emph>freedom of science</emph>. It means independence from
every external authority and restraint in research and teaching,
the unhindered development and assertion of one's own intellectual
personality. Man must let himself be directed only by his
own judgment and his instinct for the truth, or his personal
need, without heeding dogmas, Church laws, tradition, or any
other external norm whatsoever. This is particularly true in the
<emph>domain of philosophy and religion</emph>, in questions regarding
the world and life, and in fundamental social questions.
<pb n='017'/><anchor id='Pg017'/>
This is principally, and almost exclusively, the field in
which an authoritative influence of the Church, or state, or society
in general, is to be feared. Hence the importance of the
question of the freedom of science in this field.
</p>

<p>
This is also the manner in which the advocates of modern
freedom of science unanimously describe it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For the academic teacher, says <hi rend='italic'>G. Kaufmann</hi>, there are <q>strictly
speaking only the barriers drawn by his own instinct for the truth.
It is in this sense that we demand freedom of science to-day for
the university teacher. The freedom of the scientist and of the academic
teacher must not be limited by patented truth, nor by faint-hearted
consideration</q> (Die Lehrfreiheit an den deutschen Universitaeten
im neunzehnten Jahrhundert (1898), 36). The first resolution
proposed at the <hi rend='italic'>Second Conference of German University Teachers</hi>, at
Jena, in September, 1908, was this: <q>The purpose of scientific research,
and the communication of its results, demand that it be independent of
every consideration foreign to scientific method itself.</q> Of this resolution
we have from another source the following explanation: <q>Therefore,
it should be independent especially of tradition and the prejudices
of the masses, independent of authority and social bodies, independent
of party interest.</q> (This was the addition to the thesis as originally
formulated by Prof. <hi rend='italic'>von Amira</hi>. Beilage der Muenchener Neuesten Nachrichten,
July 9, 1908.) And Prof. <hi rend='italic'>F. Paulsen</hi> writes: <q>No thought can
be commanded or forbidden the academic teacher or his audience</q> (Die
deutschen Universitaeten und das Universitaets-studium, 1902, 288).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi> likewise teaches that <q>In regard to research and knowledge
there must be unlimited freedom,</q> especially in matters of religion.
Here <q>man must fully understand his own innermost being;
the soul must recognize its own needs and the indicated way to their
satisfaction. This it can do only when it is entirely free.</q> <q>The fear
that thereby the door to serious error is thrown open should not in
the least deter it, for the most serious error of all is the opinion that
man should not enjoy perfect freedom in the determination of his state</q>
(Neue Freie Presse, 7 Juni, 1908).
</p>

<p>
The same demands are made by free-thinkers, who are always and
everywhere in favor of free science. The <hi rend='italic'>International Congress of
Free-thinkers</hi>, held at Rome in June, 1904, thus defines free-thought:
<q>Since free-thought cannot concede to any authority whatever the
right to oppose human reason, or even to supersede it, it demands
that its advocates reject directly not only any compulsory belief, but
also every authority that tries to enforce its dogmas, even though
such an authority be based on revelation, or though it command obedience
to dogmas or a-priori principles of philosophy, or to the decisions
of public authority or the vote of a majority.</q>&mdash;We shall have frequent
occasion to speak of this freedom in these pages.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Hence it is easily seen that this view differs from the one
we considered before. Freedom from <emph>all</emph> external restraint
<pb n='018'/><anchor id='Pg018'/>
has superseded freedom from <emph>unjust</emph> restraint. The presumption
has found acceptance that every interference by
authority is unjust, a violation of the natural rights of man and
his thought. On what is this presumption based? In other
words: What are the philosophical premises of modern freedom
of science? We shall be occupied with this question now
for some time. For only after we have attentively considered
it, can we gain an intelligent idea of the nature of this freedom,
of its methods, and of the justice of its claims. Advocates
of this view not infrequently think they have exhausted
its meaning when they have protested against ecclesiastical encroachments,
when they have held forth against Syllabus and
Index. Of the deeper thoughts it contains they have scarcely
any idea.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Humanitarian View of the World.</head>

<p>
We may distinguish a twofold basis for this view, a general
and a particular one. The latter, which is connected with the
former, is subjectivism in thought. The former, the more
<emph>general</emph>, at the same time the <emph>real basis of the modern
freedom of science</emph>, is that particular view of man and his
position in the world, which we may call the theory of humanitarianism.
We are familiar with this word&mdash;it has its history.
The word of itself conveys a good meaning: it means human
nature and dignity, thought and desire worthy of man, nobility
of culture. During the Renaissance the so-called <q>humanists</q>
identified culture with knowledge of the ancient classical
literature. Many of them, however, added to the admiration of
classical literature also preference for pagan tastes, to the contempt
of the Christian spirit. Since that time the word <emph>humanitarian</emph>
has never lost its unchristian sense; it has ever
been made the motto of men who emancipated themselves from
God and Christianity. Hence it is extensively the motto of our
times.
</p>

<p>
It has changed the position of man. It has forgotten that
man is a created, limited, even a fallen being, withal destined
for eternal existence. To it man is everything; man left to himself
and to his life in this world, severed from God and his
<pb n='019'/><anchor id='Pg019'/>
eternal destiny, an <emph>absolute, purely worldly being</emph>. No
longer does he look up to Heaven, no longer does he get
from above his laws, his hope for help, and strength, and
eternal life. He is his own and only end: he and his earthly
happiness and advancement. In himself alone he sees the source
of his strength, in himself he finds his law, to himself alone is he
responsible, the inherited corruption of his nature he has
forgotten. What God once was to our fathers&mdash;the end and
rule of their life&mdash;that now is Man to their sons. The
anthropocentric has succeeded the theocentric view of the
world. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diis extinctis successit humanitas</foreign> (Man has succeeded
the fallen gods). <q>Out of the corrupted nations and decaying
religions let there arise a more beautiful humanity!</q> is
the radical cry of this humanitarian religion.
</p>

<p>
When in 1892 the battle for a new school law was raging
in Prussia, <hi rend='italic'>Caprivi</hi>, the Chancellor of the Empire, said:
<q>It is here question of a contrast between Christianity and
atheism. Essential to man is his relation to God.</q> Scarcely
had these words been uttered when a champion of modern
thought, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Jodl</hi>, took up his pen and wrote: <q>No
sharper contrast with the convictions of the modern world is
imaginable than that expressed by the words of the imperial
Chancellor, <q>essential to man is his relation to God.</q> To
this sentence, which might be expected in a speech of Cromwell,
or in a papal encyclical, rather than from a statesman of modern
Germany, liberalism must with all possible emphasis oppose
this other sentence: What determines the real worth of a man,
is, first and last, his relation to humanity</q> (Moral, Religion
und Schule, 1892, 14f.). <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diis extinctis successit humanitas</foreign>.
We shall not deny that the modern spirit is a complicated structure:
but neither can any one deny that its chief characteristic
is the humanitarian view, with its emancipation from
God, its decided emphasis of the things of this world, and
its boundless overestimation of man.
</p>

<p>
An attentive observer of these days, should he chance to come
from an old, Catholic town, and saunter with observant eye
through one of our great modern cities, particularly a Protestant
one, would behold a vivid realization of this modern view
<pb n='020'/><anchor id='Pg020'/>
of the world. The most prominent feature of the Catholic town
of old was the House of God. It towered high above the city,
its spires reached heavenward; the houses of the faithful clung
around the House of God like chicks about the mother hen. The
mere sight told the beholder that here dwelt a people whose
thoughts were directed towards the other world; over their
lives ruled the sacred peace of eternity.
</p>

<p>
But here all is different. Here the most prominent feature
is no longer the House of God; worldly edifices have usurped its
place; railroad depots, barracks, city-hall and court-house dominate
the city. The state house bears no longer on its front the
Christian motto, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Nisi Dominus custodierit</foreign> (<q>Unless the Lord
keep the city he watcheth in vain that keepeth it</q>). It would be
considered a degradation should the state base its existence upon
religion. Should, then, the observer enter the legislature he
would learn the modern principles of state wisdom. The state
as such has no relation to religion; the principle is the separation
of state and Church. In the public squares he beholds
mighty monuments, erected, not to religious heroes and leaders,
as perhaps of old, but to great men of the world, champions of
national progress. At their feet lie wreaths of homage. They
have brought modern humanity to its full stature, maturity, and
self-consciousness. Here it is Man who is standing everywhere
in the foreground. <q>It is I,</q> says he, <q>that lives here. Here
I have pitched my tent, from this earth come all my joys, and
this sun is shining upon my sorrows.</q>
</p>

<p>
Our observer, wandering about, finds everywhere magnificent
state-schools, scientific institutes, splendid colleges and
universities. In years gone by a cross or a word of divine
wisdom was probably found here somewhere. It is seen no
more. Often it would seem that we can almost hear the
words: <q>We will not have this One rule over us.</q> Here a
new race is being reared, which no longer follows blindly
the <q>old tradition,</q> it believes in its own self and its own
reason: culture and science take the place of the old religion.
He finds but few churches; and where found they are
mostly overshadowed by great palaces, and&mdash;mostly empty.
The modern man passes them by. He has no longer any understanding
<pb n='021'/><anchor id='Pg021'/>
for the truths of the Christian religion. It fails to
satisfy him because it does not appeal to modern ways of thinking
and feeling, because it does not symbolize the humanitarian
creed. His desire is no longer for Heaven; his
aspirations are earthward. <q>The life beyond concerns me
little: my joys come from this world.</q> Contemplating modern
civilization he exclaims, with the king of Babylon: <q>Is not
this the great Babylon, which I have built to be the seat of
the kingdom, by the strength of my power, and in the glory of
my excellence?</q> (Dan. iv. 27). The doctrine of a nature corrupted
by original sin, of a darkened intellect that needs divine
revelation, of a weakened will that needs strength from above, of
sin that demands atonement,&mdash;all this has become meaningless
to him, it offends his higher sentiments, his human dignity. He
has no longer any understanding for a Saviour of the world, in
whom alone salvation is to be sought, much less for a Cross.
This sign of redemption, as a certain herald of modern thought
remarked, weighs like a mountain upon the mind of our day.
He has no longer any understanding for the saving institution of
the Church, by whom he should be led: she is to him an institution
of intellectual serfdom. He makes his own religion, free
from dogma, just as his individuality desires, just as he
<q>lives</q> it.
</p>

<p>
Should our observer, while visiting the Protestant city, make
a final visit to its university, he will find there the thoughts,
which hitherto he had but vaguely felt, clothed in scientific
language. There they meet his gaze, defined sharply on
the pedestal of Research as the Modern Philosophy, protected,
often exclusively privileged, by the state license of teaching.
It is the modern scientific view of the world, the only one that
men of modern times may hold. From here it is to find its
way to wider circles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Man,</q> we are told by a pupil of <hi rend='italic'>Feuerbach</hi>, in accord with
his master's teaching, <q>man is man's god. And only by the enthronement
of this human god can the super-human and ultra-human God
be made superfluous. What Christianity was and claimed to be in
times gone by, that now is claimed by humanity.</q> <q>The being which
man in religion and theology reveres,</q> continues <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi> with <hi rend='italic'>Feuerbach</hi>,
<q>is his own being, the essence of his own desires and ideals. If you
<pb n='022'/><anchor id='Pg022'/>
eliminate from this conception all that is mere fancy and contrary to the
laws of nature, what is left is a cultural ideal of civilization, a refined
humanity, which will become a reality by its own independent strength
and labour</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Ludwig Feuerbach</hi>, 1904, 111 f., 194). <q>The greatest
achievement of modern times,</q> says another panegyrist of emancipated
humanity, <q>is the deliverance from the traditional bondage of a direct
revelation.... Neither revelation nor redemption approach man from
without; he is bound rather to struggle for his perfection by his own
strength. What he knows about God, nature, and his own self, is of his
own doing. He is in reality <q>the measure of all things, of those that
are, and why they are; of those that are not, and why they are not.</q>
Of his dignity as an image of God, he has therefore not lost anything;
on the contrary, he has come nearer to his resemblance to God,
his highest end, by his consciousness of being self-existent and of
having the destiny to produce everything of himself; from a receptive
being he has become a spontaneous one; he has at last come to a
clear knowledge of his own real importance and destiny</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Spicker</hi>, Der
Kampf zweier Weltanschauungen, 1898, 134).
</p>

<p>
Hence <q>not to make man religious,</q> to quote again the above-mentioned
exponent of modern wisdom of life, <q>but to educate, to promote
culture among all classes and professions, this is the task of the present
time.</q> <q>Religion cannot therefore be the watchword of a progressive
humanity; neither the religion of the past nor the religion that
is to be looked for in the future, but ethics</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>, ibid., 108, 112).
Ethics, to be sure, the fundamental principles of which are not the commandments
of God, by the keeping of which we are to reach our eternal
happiness, but human laws, which are observed for the sake of man.
<q>Morality and religion,</q> we are told, <q>shall no longer give us a
narrow ladder on which we, each one for himself, climb to the heights
of the other world; we are vaulting a majestic dome above this
earth under which the generations come and go, succeeding each
other in continuous procession.... The day will come when the
rays of thought which are now dawning upon the highest and freest
mountain-tops will bring the light of noonday down to mankind.</q> Woe
to us, if from these high mountain-tops, where the bare rocks no longer
take life and fecundity from the heavens, the sad desert of estrangement
from God should extend into the fresh green of the valleys!
</p>

<p>
The central ideas of the humanitarian view of the world appear
again, though under different form, among Freemasons and free-thinkers,
agitators for free religion and free schools. It is well known
that Freemasonry has emblazoned <q>humanity</q> upon its standard.
<q>One word of the highest meaning,</q> so wrote an official authority some
years ago, <q>contains in itself the principle, the purpose, and the
whole tenor of Freemasonry, this word is humanity. Humanity is
indeed everything to us.</q> <q>What is humanity? It is all, and only
that, which is human</q> (Freiburger Ritual, 24. <hi rend='italic'>Pachtler</hi>, Der Goetze
der Humanitaet, 1875, 249 f.). <q>That which is essentially human
is the sublime, divine, and the only Christian ideal,</q> adds another
authority, addressing the aspirant to Freemasonry. <q>Leave behind
you in the world your different church-formulas when you enter our
temple, but let there always be with you the sense for what is holy in
<pb n='023'/><anchor id='Pg023'/>
man, the religion which alone makes us happy</q> (Latomia, 1868, p. 167,
<hi rend='italic'>Pachtler</hi>, 248). As early as 1823 the <q>Zeitschrift fuer Freimauerei</q>
wrote: <q>We should be accused of idolatry should we personify the idea
of humanity in the way in which the Divinity is usually personified.
This is indeed our reason for withholding from the eyes of profane persons
the humanitarian cult, till the time has come when, from east to
west, from noon to midnight, its high ideal will be pondered and its cult
propagated everywhere</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pachtler</hi>, 255).
</p>

<p>
The time has already come when <q>the rays of thought that
dawned upon the mountain-tops</q> are descending into the valley.
The Twenty-second Convention of German Free-religionists, at Goerlitz,
at the end of May, 1907, passed this resolution: <q>The Convention
sees one of its chief tasks in the alliance of all anti-clericals
and free-thinkers, and tries by united effort to obtain this common
end and interest by promoting culture, liberty of mind, and humanitarianism.</q>
There was, moreover, taken up for discussion the thesis:
<q>Free-religionists reject the teaching that declares man lost by original
sin, unable to raise himself of his own strength and reason, that
directs him to revelation, redemption, and grace from above.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This view of the world finds its most characteristic expression
in <emph>pantheism</emph>, which, though expressed in various and often
fantastic forms, is eminently the religion of modern man.
From this gloomy depth of autotheism the apotheosis of man
and his earthly life, the modern consciousness of freedom, draws
its strength and determination.
</p>

<p>
To find this modern view of man expressed in the language
of consistent radicalism, let us hear <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Nietzsche</hi>, the most
modern of all philosophers. His ideal is the transcendental
man, who knows that God is dead, that now there is no bar
to stepping forth in unrestricted freedom to superhuman greatness
and independence. To this <q>masterman,</q> who deems
himself superior to others, everything is licit that serves his
egotism and will, everything that will promote his interest
to the disadvantage of the rabble; probity is cowardice!
<q>But now this god is dead. Ye superior men, this god
was your greatest danger.</q> Thus spoke Zarathustra. <q>Only
since this god is buried do you begin to rise. Now at length
the great Noon is in its zenith. Now the superior man becomes
master. Onward and upward, then, ye superior men!
At last the mountain of man's future is in travail. God is dead;
let the superior man arise and live.</q> (Also sprach Zarathustra,
W. W. VI, 418.) And, in the consciousness that the Christian
<pb n='024'/><anchor id='Pg024'/>
religion condemns this self-exaltation, he breaks out in this
blasphemous charge: <q>I call Christianity the one great curse, the
one great internal corruption.... I call it the one immortal,
disgraceful, blot on mankind</q> (Antichrist, W. W. VIII, 313).
This is independent humanity in the cloak of fanaticism.
<hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> has carried the modern view of the world to its final
consequences; the autonomous man has developed into the god-like
superman who carries into effect the behest: Ye shall be
as gods; his code of ethics is that of the autocrat who is above
the notions of good and bad.
</p>

<p>
And <q>let no one deceive himself,</q> writes an intelligent observer
of the times, <q>the spirit of our time is attuned to
<hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi> idea.</q> Consciously or unconsciously this sentiment
dominates more minds than many a man learned in the wisdom
of the schools may dream of. Did <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> create this spirit?
Certainly not: he grew out of it, he has only given it a philosophical
setting. <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> would never have caused that tremendous
sensation, never have gathered around him his enthusiastic
followers, had not the soil been prepared. As it was, he appeared
to <q>his</q> men as the Messiah <q>in the fulness of time.</q>
He, too, in his own way <q>loosened the tongue of the dumb
and opened the eyes of the blind.</q> The veiled anti-Christian
spirit, the unconscious religious and ethical nihilism, which
no one before dared profess openly, though it was hatching in
the minds, now had found its <q>master,</q> its <q>scientific system</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Von Grotthuss</hi>, Tuermer, VII, 1905, 79). It is, asserts
<hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>, <q>the new ideal of free personality, dependent on precarious
moods and chance influences, that has found in
<hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi> philosophy a fantastic expression</q> (Ethik, ed. 3.
1905, p. 522).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Autonomous Man.</head>

<p>
Now we have a clearer idea of modern freedom. It is known
as autonomism. The individual wants to be a law to himself, his
own court of last appeal; he wants to develop his personality,
feeling, desires, and thought, independently of all authority.
Too long, it is said, have man's aspirations been directed upward,
away from things, of this world, to a supernatural world.
<pb n='025'/><anchor id='Pg025'/>
Religion and Church seek to determine his thought and desire,
to subject him to dogma. Too long has he clung like a child to
the apron-strings of authority. Man has at last awoken to self-consciousness
and to a sense of his own dignity, after a period of
estrangement, so to say, from himself; he has become himself
again, as the poet sang when the century of the <q>illuminati</q> was
closing:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>How beautiful, with palm of victory,</q></l>
<l>O man, thou standest at the century's close,</l>
<l>The mightiest son thy Time has given birth,</l>
<l>By reason free, by law and precept strong,</l>
<l>Alike in meekness great and treasure rich,</l>
<l><q rend='post'>So long unknown concealed within thy breast.</q></l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
Yes, man has discovered the treasure that long lay hidden in
his breast, the seed and bud that longed to burst forth into life
and blossom. Now the motto is: Independent self-development;
no more restraint, but living out one's personality. The eagle
is not given wings to be bound down upon the earth; nor does
the bud come forth never to unfold. Full freedom, therefore,
too, for everything human! And modern man leaps to the fatal
conclusion: therefore all interference of external authority is
unjust, is force, constraint upon my being; the same error
that boys fall into when life begins to tingle with its fulness
of strength. Being ignorant of their nature, they feel any kind
of dependence a chain; only themselves, their judgments and
desires, are law. Just so modern man, in his deplorable want
of self-knowledge, fails to see how he is cutting himself off from
the source and support of life; how he is pulling himself out
by the roots from the soil whence he derives his strength; how,
left to his own littleness, he withers away; how, abandoned to
his own diseased nature, he condemns himself to intellectual
decay.
</p>

<p>
Autonomism, individualism, independent personality&mdash;these
have become the ideals that permeate the man of this age, and
influence the thought of thousands without their knowing it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The well-known, Protestant, theologian, <hi rend='italic'>A. Sabatier</hi>, writes: <q>It is
not difficult to find the common principle to which all the expressions
and tendencies of the spirit of modern times can be reduced in any field
<pb n='026'/><anchor id='Pg026'/>
whatever. One word expresses it&mdash;the word, <q>autonomy.</q> By autonomy
I understand the firm confidence, which the mind of man has attained
in his present stage of development, that he contains in himself
his own rule of life and norm of thought, and that he harbours
the ardent desire of realizing himself by obeying his own law</q> (La
Religion de la Culture moderne, 10).
</p>

<p>
<q>Modern times,</q> writes <hi rend='italic'>R. Eucken</hi>, <q>have changed the position of
the human subject ... it has become to them the centre of his life
and the ultimate end of his endeavours</q> (Zeitschrift fuer Philosophie
und philosophische Kritik, 112 (1898), 165 s.). Still clearer
are the following words of <hi rend='italic'>G. Spicker</hi>: <q>Man depended formerly
either on nature or on revelation, or on both at once; now it is just
the opposite: man is in every way, theoretically as well as practically,
an autonomist. If anything can denote clearly the characteristic difference
between the modern and the old scholastic view, it is this
absolute, subjective, standpoint.</q> <q>As we in principle do not intend
to depend on any objectivity or authority, there is nothing left but
the autonomy of the subject</q> (Der Kampf zweier Weltanschauungen
(1898), 143, 145).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A noted apostle of modern freedom exclaims enthusiastically:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>This after all is freedom: an unconditional appreciation of human
greatness, no matter how it asserts itself. This greatest happiness, as
<hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi> called it, the humanists have restored to us. Henceforth we
must with all our strength retain it. Whoever wants to rob us of
it, even should he descend from heaven, is our deadliest enemy.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>H.
St. Chamberlain.</hi>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is true, of course, that man should strive for perfection
of self in every respect; for the harmonious development of
all the faculties and good inclinations of his own being, and, in
this sense, for a nobler humanity; he should also develop and
assert his own peculiar disposition and originality, so far as
they are in order, and thus promote a healthy individualism.
But all this he should do within the moral bonds of his created
and limited nature, being convinced that only by keeping within
the right limits of his being can he develop his ability and
personality harmoniously; he dare not reach out, in reckless venture
after independence, to free himself from God and his eternal
end, and from the yoke of truth; he dare not transform the
divine sovereignty into the distorted image of created autotheism.
</p>

<p>
He who professes a Christian view of the world, can see
in such a view of man and his freedom only an utter misunderstanding
of human nature and an overthrow of the right
<pb n='027'/><anchor id='Pg027'/>
order of things. This overthrow, again, can only produce calamity,
interior and exterior disorder. Woe to the planet that
feels its orbit a tyrannical restraint, and leaves it to move in sovereign
freedom through the universe! It will move along free,
and free will it go to ruin. Woe to the speeding train that
leaves its track; it will speed on free, but invariably dash
itself to pieces! A nature that abandons the prescribed safeguards
can only degenerate into a wild sprout. We shall see
how these principles have actually become in modern intellectual
life the principles of negation and intellectual degeneration.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> states the history of mankind in the following,
thoughtful words: <q>A twofold love divides mankind
into the City of the World and the City of God. Man's self-love
and his self-exaltation pushed to the contempt of God constitute
the City of the World; but the love of God pushed to contempt
of self is the foundation of the City of God.</q> (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Fecerunt
itaque civitates duas amores duo, terrenam scilicet amor sui
usque ad contemptum Dei, coelestem vero amor Dei usque ad
contemptum sui.</foreign> De civ. Dei XIV, 28.) Thus <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>,
while contemplating the time when the war between
heathenism and Christianity was raging. The same spectacle
is presented to our own eyes to-day, probably more thoroughly
than ever before in history.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Period of Man's Emancipation.</head>

<p>
The modern view of man and his freedom has shaped itself
gradually in recent times; the present is ever the child of the
past. The most important factor in this development was undoubtedly
the <emph>Reformation</emph>. It emancipated man in the
most important affair, religious life, from the authority of the
Church, and made him independent. <q>All have the right to
try and to judge what is right and wrong in belief,</q> so <hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>
told the Christian nobility of the German nation; <q>everybody
shall according to his believing mind interpret the Scriptures,
it is the duty of every believing Christian to espouse the faith,
to understand and defend it, and to condemn all errors.</q>
Protestantism means even to the modern man <q>the thinking
<pb n='028'/><anchor id='Pg028'/>
mind's break with authority, a protest against being fettered
by anything positive, the mind's return to itself from self-alienation</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Schwegler</hi>, Geschichte der Philosophie (1887),
167): <q>it puts out of joint the Christian Church organization,
and overturns its supernatural foundation, quite against its will,
but with an actual, and ever more plainly visible, effect</q> (<hi rend='italic'>E.
Troeltsch</hi>, Die Bedeutung des Protestantismus fuer die
Entstehung der modernen Welt (1906), 29).
</p>

<p>
The first step towards full autonomy was taken with energy;
the emancipation from external authority then progressed rapidly
in the domain of politics, sociology, economy, and especially
of religion, to the very elimination of everything supernatural.
There came the English individualism of the seventeenth century.
The liberty of <q>individual conviction,</q> termed also
<q>tolerance,</q> in the sense of rejecting every authoritative interference
in the sanctuary of man's thought and feeling, was
extolled; of course at first only as the privilege of those who
were intellectually superior. Soon the Deism of a <hi rend='italic'>Herbert of
Cherbury</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Locke</hi> was reached; it was the religion of
natural reason, with belief in God and the obligation to moral
action. Whatever is added by positive religions, and therefore
by the Christian religion, is superfluous; hence not dogma, but
freedom! <hi rend='italic'>Locke</hi>, indeed, denied to atheists state toleration; but
<hi rend='italic'>J. Toland</hi> already advised full freedom of thought, even to the
tolerance of atheism. In the year 1717 <emph>Freemasonry</emph> came into
existence in England. <hi rend='italic'>Adam Smith</hi> originated the idea of a
liberal political economy which frees the individual from all
bond, even in the economic field. The views prevailing in
England then exert great influence in France. <hi rend='italic'>Rousseau</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Voltaire</hi> appear.
</p>

<p>
In France and Germany the enlightenment of the eighteenth
century makes rapid strides in the direction of emancipation.
<q>The enlightenment of the eighteenth century,</q> writes <hi rend='italic'>H.
Heltner</hi>, <q>not only resumes the prematurely interrupted work
of the sixteenth century, the Reformation, but carries it on independently,
and in its own way. The thoughts and demands of the
<q>enlightened</q> are bolder and more aggressive, more unscrupulous
and daring.... With <hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi> the idea of revelation remained
<pb n='029'/><anchor id='Pg029'/>
intact; the new method of thought rejects the idea of a divine
revelation, and bases all religious knowledge on merely human
thought and sentiment.... It is only the free, entirely independent
thought that decides in truth and justice, moral
and political rights and duties. Reason has regained its self-glory;
man comes to his senses again</q> (Literaturgeschichte
des 18. Jahrhunderts II (1894), 553). <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> gave it a philosophical
setting.
</p>

<p>
Then the <emph>French Revolution</emph> breaks into fierce blaze, writing
on the skies of Europe with flaming letters the ideas of emancipated
humanity; the adherents to the old religion are sent
to the guillotine. On August 27, 1789, the proclamation of the
<q>rights of man</q> is made. <q>The principles of 1789,</q> as they
are now called, henceforth dominate the nineteenth century.
The system which adopted these principles called itself, and still
calls itself, <emph>Liberalism</emph>.
</p>

<p>
Liberalism as a principle&mdash;we are speaking of the principles
of liberalism, not of its adherents, who for the most part
do not carry out these principles in their consequences, and
occasionally do not even grasp them completely&mdash;tried to accomplish
man's utter emancipation from all external and superior
authority. It sought to accomplish this in the political field,
by instituting constitutional, and, wherever possible, a republican
form of government; in the field of economy, by granting freedom
to labour and possession, to capital and commerce; but
especially in the field of morals and religion, by emancipating
thought and science, and the entire life of man,&mdash;school, marriage,
state,&mdash;from every religious influence and direction, and
in this sense it aimed at humanizing the whole life of man. This
is its purpose. To achieve this, it aims at establishing itself
in the state, by gaining political power through the aid of
compulsory laws, of course against all principles of freedom;
it tries to attain this by compulsory state-education, by obligatory
civil marriage, and so on. At first there appeared
only a moderate liberalism, which gradually gave place to a
more radical tendency, striving more directly and openly
toward the enfeeblement and, if possible, the destruction of
the Christian view of the world and its chief representative,
<pb n='030'/><anchor id='Pg030'/>
the Church. In 1848 the well-known materialist <hi rend='italic'>K. Vogt</hi> said
at the national assembly in Frankfort: <q>Every church is
opposed to a free development of mankind, in that it demands
faith above all. Every church is an obstacle in the way of man's
free intellectual development, and since I am for such intellectual
development of man, I am against every church</q> (cf.
<hi rend='italic'>Rothenbuecher</hi>, Trennung von Staat und Kirche (1908), 106).
</p>

<p>
In the field of economics, every one can see how liberalism
has failed. In some countries people were ashamed to retain
its name any longer. It suddenly disappeared from public life,
and gave place to its translation,&mdash;free thought. This shows
that nobody cares to boast of its success. All barriers of safety
had been removed in a night; crises, confusion, and the serious
danger of the social question were the consequence. In the field
of actual economics it became clear that the principle of unlimited
freedom could not be carried out, because it was utterly ruinous,
and it really means a complete misunderstanding of human
nature. Therefore liberalism has disappeared from this field,
leaving to others to solve the problem it created, and to heal
the wounds it inflicted. It is otherwise in the field of theoretical
economics. Here it still strives to dominate, often more thoroughly
than before, no matter what name it may assume. The
consequences do not appear so gross to the eyes as they would
in the tangible sphere of sociology. Especially science it wants
to hold in subjection to its principles of freedom in undiminished
severity.
</p>

<p>
That freedom which is identified with absolute independence
from all authority, especially in the intellectual sphere,
we shall here know as Liberal freedom, in contradistinction
to Christian freedom, which is satisfied with independence from
unjust restraint.
</p>

<p>
In the foregoing discussion it has been shown how deeply the
liberal idea of freedom is imbedded in the unchristian philosophical
view of the world. The inevitable result is a freedom
of science which considers every authoritative interference in
research and teaching as an encroachment upon the rights of
free development in man's personality, especially in the sphere
of philosophy and religion. Moreover, the humanitarian view
<pb n='031'/><anchor id='Pg031'/>
of the world, insisting on the independence of man and his
earthly life, naturally demands the exclusion of God and the
other world, it orders the rejection of <q>dualism</q> as unscientific,
and the adoption of the monistic view in its stead; an autonomous
science can hardly be reconciled with a superior, restricting
authority. Later on we shall demonstrate that the main
law of modern science is that the supernatural is inadmissible.
Furthermore, since science is not a superhuman being,
but has its seat in the intellect of man, subject to the psychology
of man, every one who knows the heart of man will suspect
from the outset that man cannot stop at merely ignoring, but
will often proceed to combat and explain away faith, the Church,
and all authority that might be considered an oppressor of
the truth. This undue love of liberty will of itself become
a struggle for freedom against the oppressor. How far this
is actually the case we shall have occasion to discuss later on.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
We have heard <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi> haughty and proud boast. Shortly
after the philosopher had penned these words he was stricken
(1889) with permanent, incurable insanity, with which he
was afflicted till his death in 1900. The <q>transcendental
man</q> was dethroned. The strength of the Titan was shattered.
He that said with <hi rend='italic'>Prometheus</hi>, I am not a god, still I am in
strength the equal of any of them, received the ironical answer,
<q>Behold he has become as one of us</q> (Gen. iii. 22). He
that cursed Christian charity towards the poor and suffering,
was now cast helpless upon charity. His grave at Roecken, the
place also of his birth, is a sign of warning to the modern world.
</p>

<p>
To the believing Christian a different grave opens on Easter
day. From it comes the risen God-man; in His hand the
banner of immortal victory. It points the way to true human
greatness, to a superior humanity according to the will
of God. Man longs for perfection; he longs to go beyond
the narrow limits of his present condition. But modern
man wants to rise to greatness by his own strength, without
help from above; he would rise with giant bounds, without
law. In his weakness he falls; error and scepticism and
the loss of morality are the bitter fruit. Another way is pointed
<pb n='032'/><anchor id='Pg032'/>
out by the great Friend of Man. Humanity is to be led on the
way of progress by the hand of God, by faith in God, supported
by His grace; thus man shall participate in God's nature, shall
one day attain his highest perfection in eternal life, far beyond
the limits of his present condition. <q>I am the way, the truth,
and the life.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='033'/><anchor id='Pg033'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Subjectivism And Its Freedom.</head>

<p>
The tendency of the modern intellect to independence in its
own peculiar sphere of thinking and knowing, cannot fail
to work itself out energetically. In this sphere it leads naturally
to that view of human reasoning called subjectivism: the thinking
or reasoning subject is its own law, the autonomous creator
and guide of its thought. Herein lies the <emph>essential presumption</emph>,
the very core, of the liberal freedom of science. Wherever
we turn we meet subjectivism with its autonomous rejection of all
authority, its arbitrary separation of knowledge from faith, its
agnosticism, its relativity to truth as the moving factor of, and
the ostensible warrant for, this freedom, especially in the
sphere which it considers peculiarly its own, philosophy and religion.
Only when we look closer into its philosophical premises
will it be possible to form a judgment of the <q>scientific
method</q> it employs in this, its peculiar sphere, and of the justice
of its claim to be the sole administrator of man's ideal possessions,
and to be altogether <q>independent of every view not
conforming to this scientific method.</q> Before considering subjectivism
let us by way of preface set down a few considerations
on the nature of human, intellectual perception.
</p>

<div>
<head>Objectivism and Subjectivism.</head>

<p>
It always has been, and still is, the firm conviction of unbiassed
men,&mdash;a conviction which irresistibly forces itself upon us,&mdash;that
in our intellectual perception and thought we grasp an
<emph>objective, exterior order of things, an existence distinct
from our thought</emph>; of this objective reality we reproduce
an image in our minds, and thus grasp it intellectually. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cognitio
est similitudo rei</foreign>, says the old school; that is, Knowledge is
<pb n='034'/><anchor id='Pg034'/>
the reproduction of an objective reality, which thus becomes the
criterion of cognition. The reproduction is a counterpart of
the original. In this perfect resemblance of our cognition to
the objective reality there has ever been recognized the <emph>truth</emph>
of knowledge.
</p>

<p>
When the thinking mind has arrived at the mathematical
truth that the circumference of a circle is the product of the diameter
multiplied by <hi rend='italic'>Ludolph's</hi> number, it knows&mdash;unless
indeed it has lost its natural candour&mdash;that it has not of itself
produced this result of reasoning, but that it has recognized
in it an objective reality of truth, distinct from its own
thought, and has reproduced that truth in itself. And because
this reproduction corresponds to the reality, it is called true cognition.
Similarly, when the intellect expresses the general law
of causality, namely, everything that happens has a cause, the
intellect is again convinced that it has not of itself produced
this result of reasoning, but has only reproduced it by assimilating
to itself an objective truth which is necessarily so and
cannot be otherwise, and which the mind must assimilate if it
wants to think aright. This is true not only when the mind is
dealing with concrete things, but also when it would give expression
to general principles, as in the present instance; these, too,
are not subjective projections, but are independent of the thinking
subject, and are eternal laws.
</p>

<p>
This view of the nature of human cognition and thought has
gradually undergone an essential change, not indeed with those
outside the influence of philosophical speculation, but with the
representatives of modern philosophy, and those subject to its
influence. Objectivism has been superseded by subjectivism. Its
principle is this: cognition, imagination, and thought are not
the intellectual apprehension of an objective world existing independent
of us, of which we reproduce in ourselves a counterpart.
No, <emph>the mind creates its own results of reason and cognition</emph>;
the objects before us are the creatures of the imagining
subject. At the utmost, we can but say that our reasoning
is the manner in which a hidden exterior world appears to us.
This manner must necessarily conform to the peculiarity of the
subject, to his faculties and stage of development; but the exterior
<pb n='035'/><anchor id='Pg035'/>
world as it is in itself we can never apprehend. <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi>, starting
with the premise that consciousness is the beginning of all
certainty, was the first modern philosopher to enter upon the way
of subjectivism. He was followed by <hi rend='italic'>Locke</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Berkeley</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>.
It is due to them that in the modern theory of cognition the
fundamental principle of idealistic subjectivism, no matter how
difficult and unreasonable it may appear to an ordinary thinker,
has obtained so many advocates who, nevertheless, cannot adhere
to it, but contradict it at every step.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The world,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi> is convinced, <q>is the projection of my
idea.... No truth is more certain, more independent of all others,
less in need of proof, than this, that all there is to be known, hence
the whole world, is an object only in relation to a subject, a vision
of the beholder; in a word, the projection of my own idea. Hence
the subject is the bearer of the world</q> (Die Welt als Wille und
Vorstellung, I, §§ 1-2). <q>It is evidently true that knowledge cannot go
beyond our consciousness, and hence the existence of things outside
of our sphere of consciousness must, to say the least, remain problematical</q>
(Der Gegenstand der Erkenntniss, 1892, p. 2). In like
manner <hi rend='italic'>O. Liebmann</hi> says: <q>We can never go beyond our individual
sphere of ideas (projection of our ideas), even though we apprehend
what is independent of us, still the absolute reality of it is
known to us only as our own idea</q> (Zur Analysis der Wirklichkeit,
1900, p. 28). Therefore <q>the contrast between <q>I</q> and the world,</q>
says <hi rend='italic'>E. Mach</hi>, <q>between feeling or apprehension and the reality, falls
away</q> (Die Analysis der Empfindungen, 2d ed., 1900, p. 9). And
a disciple of <hi rend='italic'>Mach</hi> says: <q>It is important to hold fast to the idea
that a self-existent, divine Truth, independent of the subject, objectively
binding, enthroned, so to say, above men and gods, is meaningless....
Such a Truth is nonsense</q> (<hi rend='italic'>H. Kleinpeter</hi>, Kantstudien,
VIII, 1903, p. 314).
</p>

<p>
None of these representatives of worldly wisdom are able to fulfil the
first duty of the wise man: <q>Live according to what you teach.</q> Even
the sceptic <hi rend='italic'>Hume</hi> has to admit that in the common affairs of life he
feels himself compelled of necessity to talk and act like other people.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Subjectivism is really nothing but <emph>scepticism</emph>, for it eliminates
the knowableness of objective truth. But it is a masked&mdash;if
you will, a reformed&mdash;scepticism. Cognition is given another
purpose; its task is not at all, so it is said, to reproduce
or assimilate a world distinct from itself, but to create its own
contents. The very nature of cognition is reversed.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='036'/><anchor id='Pg036'/>

<div>
<head>The Autonomy of Reason.</head>

<p>
It was <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, the herald of a new era in philosophy, who gave
to this gradually maturing subjectivism its scientific form and
basis. At the same time he gave prominence to that element
of subjectivism which seems to give justification to freedom of
thought, to wit, autonomism, the creative power of the intellect
which makes its own laws. Independence of reason and free
thought have become catchwords since <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> time. They are
a precious ingredient of the autonomy of modern man.
</p>

<p>
When the flaming blaze of the French Revolution was reddening
the skies of Europe, and inaugurating the restoration of
the rights of man, <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> was sitting in his study at Königsberg,
his heart beating strongly in sympathy with the Revolution,
for he saw in it a hopeful turn of the times. An old man of
nearly seventy, he followed the events with most passionate interest.
<hi rend='italic'>Varnhagen</hi> records in his Memoirs, based on the stories
of <hi rend='italic'>Staegemann</hi>, that, when the proclamation of the Republic was
announced in the newspapers, <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, with tears in his eyes, said
to some friends: <q>Now can I say with Simeon, <q>Now dost Thou,
O Lord, dismiss Thy servant in peace, because mine eyes have
seen Thy Salvation</q></q> (<hi rend='italic'>H. Hettner</hi>, Literaturgeschichte des 18.
Jahrh. III, 4th ed., 3, 2, 1894, p. 38). While on the other side
of the Rhine the Jacobins were doing their bloody work of political
liberation, the German philosopher, the herald of a new era
and an ardent admirer of <hi rend='italic'>Rousseau</hi>, sat in his study labouring
for man's intellectual liberation. To give man the right of
autonomous self-determination in action and thought was the
work of his life. Autonomy was indeed to him <q><q>the source</q>
of all dignity of man and of every rational nature</q> (Grundlegung
zur Metaphysik der Sitten, II). And hence it was that
his ardent followers beheld in him <q>the first perfect model
of a really free German, one who had purged himself from every
trace of Roman absolutism, dogmatism, and anti-individualism</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>H. St. Chamberlain</hi>, Die Grundlagen des 19. Jahrh., 8th ed.,
1907, II, 1127).
</p>

<p>
In his <q>Grundlegung zur Metaphysik der Sitten</q> (The
Foundation of the Metaphysics of Ethics) and <q>Kritik der praktischen
<pb n='037'/><anchor id='Pg037'/>
Vernunft</q> (Critique of Practical Reason) <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> sought
to establish <emph>autonomy in moral life</emph> and action. Man himself,
his practical reason, is the ultimate foundation of all moral obligation;
did man lead a good life out of obedience to God it
would be a heteronomy unworthy of the name of <q>moral.</q>
<q>The autonomy of the will,</q> he teaches, <q>is the sole principle
of all moral laws and the duties allied to them; all arbitrary
heteronomy, on the contrary, far from having any binding force,
is contrary to the principle of morality of the will</q> (Kritik der
prakt. Vern., Elementarlehre, I, 1, 4. Lehrsatz). Or, as amplified
by a faithful interpreter of the master: <q>In the moral world
the individual should be not only a member but also a ruler;
he is a member of the moral order when he obeys its law; he
is its ruler when he enacts the law.... The distinction between
autonomy and heteronomy separates true from false ethics,
the system of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> from all other systems. All moral systems,
except that of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, are based on the principles of heteronomy;
they can have no other. And critical philosophy was the
first to grasp the principle of autonomy</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kuno Fischer</hi>,
Geschichte der neuen Philosophie, IV, 2d ed., 1869, p. 114 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
<hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> just man no longer prays <q>Thy will be done</q>; he identifies
the law with himself. <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi> transcendental man is
seen in the background.
</p>

<p>
<emph>Autonomy of thought</emph> is the result of the <q>Critique of
Pure Reason,</q> and in spite of its inconsistency of expression,
its involved sentences, its extremely tiresome style, it is and
will long continue to be the text-book of modern philosophy.
According to <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> our cognition consists in our fashioning the
substance of our perceptions and reasoning after innate, purely
subjective, views and conceptions. Time and place, and especially
the abstract notions of existence and non-existence, necessity,
causality, substance, have no truth independent of our
thought; they are but forms and patterns according to which
we are forced to picture the world. Their first matter is supplied
by sense experience, such as sound, colour, feeling;
but these, too, according to <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, are not objective. Nothing
then remains to our cognition that is not purely subjective,
having existence in ourselves alone. Our cognition is no longer
<pb n='038'/><anchor id='Pg038'/>
a reproduction, but a creation of its object; our thought is
no longer subject to an external truth that may be forced upon it.
<q>Hitherto,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, <q>it has been generally supposed that
our cognition must be governed by objects.... Let us see if we
cannot make better headway in the province of metaphysics by
supposing that objects must be governed by our cognition</q>
(Kritik der Reinen Vernunft, Vorrede zur zweiten Ausgabe).
</p>

<p>
This is, indeed, nothing but a complete falsification of human
cognition. It is evident to an unbiassed mind that there must
be a reason for everything, not because I so think, but I
think so because such is the fact; that the multiplication table
is right, not because I think so, but I must multiply according
to it simply because it is right. My thought is subject to
objective truth. But <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> autonomy means emancipation from
objective truth, and hence, though <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> himself held fast to
the unchangeable laws of thinking and acting, he energetically
opened the way for subjectivism with all its consequences. This
was <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> doing, and history credits him with it. It was one
of those events which have made men famous: the giving to the
ideas and sentiments of a period their scientific formula, and
thereby also their apparent justification.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Schiller</hi> wrote in 1805 to <hi rend='italic'>W. von Humboldt</hi>: <q>The profound fundamental
ideas of ideal philosophy remain an enduring treasure, and for
this reason alone one should think himself fortunate for having lived
at the present time.... Finally, we are both idealists, and should be
ashamed to have it said of us that things made us and not we the things.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Fr. Paulsen</hi> gives expression to the opinion of many when he says:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> gives to the intellect the self-determination that is essential to
it, and the position in the world which it deserves. He has raised the
intellect's creative power to a position of honour: the essence of the
intellect is freedom</q> (Immanuel Kant, 1898, p. 386). <q>The autonomy
of reason ... we cannot give up</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, Der Philosoph des
Protestantismus, in Philosophia militans, 2d ed., 1901, p. 51). <q>It
is indeed the offspring of Protestantism.</q> <q>To me it is beyond
doubt,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> continues, <q>that the fundamental tendency of primitive
Protestantism has here been carried out in all clearness</q> (Ibid. 43).
<hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>, too, found in the heart of the individual the unfailing source
of truth. For that reason <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> has been called the philosopher of
Protestantism.
</p>

<p>
Hence the well-known historian, <hi rend='italic'>J. Scherr</hi>, may not be wrong
when he calls the philosophy of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> <q>the foundation of granite
whereon is built the freedom of the German intellect.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='039'/><anchor id='Pg039'/>

<p>
Now, indeed, we easily understand the demand for freedom of
thought. It is unintelligible how an external authority, a divine
revelation or infallible Church, could have ever approached man,
assured him of the truth of its teaching, and laid upon him in
consequence of this testimony the obligation of accepting it as
true. <q>An external authority,</q> we are assured, <q>be it ever
so great, will never succeed in arousing in us a sense of obligation;
its laws, be they ever so lofty and earnest, will be deemed
arbitrary, simply because they come from without</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Sabatier</hi>,
La Religion et la Culture moderne, apud <hi rend='italic'>Fonsegrive</hi>,
Die Stellung der Katholiken gegenueber der Wissenschaft,
Deutsch von <hi rend='italic'>Schieser</hi> (1903), 10). Man accepts only what he
himself has produced, what is congenial to his individuality,
what is in harmony with his personal intellectual life. In the
place of truth steps <q>personal conviction,</q> the shaping of one's
views and ideals; in the place of unselfish submission to the
truth steps the <q>development of one's intellectual individuality,</q>
the <q>evolution of one's intellectual personality</q>; in a
word, free-thought. Exterior authority can no longer impose an
obligation. <q>Is there on earth,</q> asks <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, <q>an instance
where authority can decide for us in matters of belief and
thought?</q> And he answers: <q>There is none; there cannot
be on this earth an infallible teaching authority.</q> And why
not? <q>Philosophy and science must refuse to recognize such an
authority.... If I could believe all that the Church or the
Pope teaches, this one thing I could never believe, that they are
infallible; it would include a resolution, once for all, to renounce
my own judgment regarding whatever they declare true or false,
good or bad; it would be the utter renunciation of the use of
my reason and conscience.</q> (Ibid. 51-53. We shall often cite
the testimony of <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> for the purpose of illustrating modern
thought, partly because he is no longer living, partly because he
is quite an outspoken representative of the modern view of the
world, though generally regarded as moderate. Moreover, he is
without doubt one of the most widely read of the modern German
philosophers.)
</p>

<p>
The demonstration of all this is quite unique. Here it is in
brief: Were there an infallible authority, one which necessarily
<pb n='040'/><anchor id='Pg040'/>
taught the truth, then thought and science would be irrevocably
subjected to this authority: that will not do; therefore there
is no such authority. Or thus: Were there an infallible teaching,
then we should have to accept it without contradiction:
that is impossible; therefore there is no infallibility. Hence
it is clear, the protest against an infallible authority, even though
divine,&mdash;for the argument holds good also in regard to such an
authority,&mdash;is not based on the impossibility of teaching the
truth, for the authority is supposed to be infallible, but on man's
refusal to be taught. And this refusal is made in accordance
with that sovereign freedom of thought which is the natural offspring
of subjectivism; the principal renunciation is based on
its denial of objective truth. <emph>It is the rejection of the
truth.</emph>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>In advanced progress,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> continues, <q>the individual is also
separating himself from the intellectual mass of the people in order
to enjoy a separate mental existence.... The individual is beginning
to have his own ideas about things; he is no longer satisfied with the
common opinions and notions about the world and life which have
been dealt out to him by religion and mythology: all philosophy begins
with freeing the individual from common notions.</q> <q>If the individual
ideals of a personality, gifted with extraordinary power of mind
and will, happen to come in conflict with the objective morality of
the time, then there results one of those struggles which cause the
dramatic crises of history. They who thus struggled were the real
heroes of mankind. They rose against the conventional and indifferent
ideals which had grown obsolete, against untrue appearances, against
the salt that had lost its savour; they preached a new truth,
pointed out new aspirations and ideals which breathed a new strength
into life and raised it to a higher plane</q> (System der Ethik, 8th ed.,
1906, I, 372 f.).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Truly encouraging words for the modern agitator and reformer.
To summon the courage to rise above the level of the
masses, to feel within himself the centre of gravity, and to
fashion his thoughts regardless of the whole world, this is nothing
less than the beginning of philosophy and wisdom. And
should he feel himself strong-minded he may simply change all
moral and religious values which do not square with his individual
judgments. <q>To remain faithful to one's own self,</q> we are
told again, <q>that is the essence of this ideal bravery. No one can
possess this virtue who does not feel within himself the centre
<pb n='041'/><anchor id='Pg041'/>
about which life gravitates; whoever pursues exterior things as
his ultimate end cannot penetrate to interior freedom. <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi>,
by life and teaching, is a great preacher of this freedom</q>
(Ibid. II, p. 27). Self-consciousness as arrogant as that of a
pantheist like <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi>, who indeed did not pursue <q>exterior
things as the ultimate end,</q> nor God either; the self-consciousness
in which man feels himself the centre about which world
and life revolve; the will which now directs thought on its way,&mdash;these
are the life-nerves of autonomous free-thought.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In fact, inclination and will, not objective truth, are the measure and
norm of free-thought. This <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> again expresses with astonishing
candour. According to him, intelligence is after all nothing else than
a transformation of the will, this doctrine is rooted in the more modern
voluntaristic monism, and is akin to subjectivism. If our cognition
itself forms its object, then the real concept of cognition has been
lost to us, and in its place we have the will determining the action
even of the intellect. <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> says emphatically, <q>Intelligence is an
instrument of the will in the service of preservation of life.... Perhaps
it can be said that even the elementary formations of thought,
the logical and metaphysical forms of reality, are already codetermined
by the will. If the forms of abstract thought are at all the
result of biological evolution, then this must be accepted: they are
formations and conceptions of reality, which have proved effective and
life-preserving, and have therefore attained their object. The principle
of identity is in reality not a mere statement, not an indicative, but
an imperative: A is A; that is, what I have put down as A shall be
A and remain A.... If this be so, if thought and cognition be determined
fundamentally by the will, then it is altogether unintelligible
how it might finally turn against the will, and force upon it a view
against its will</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> Verhaeltniss zur Metaphysik, 1900, p. 31 f.).
</p>

<p>
We have to do here with a confusion of ideas possible only when
correct reasoning has sunk to a surprisingly low level. To think with
the will, to draw conclusions with intention, is degenerate thinking.
But now we understand better what is meant by autonomy of thought.
It gives man license to disregard by shallow reasoning everything that
clashes with his own will. <q>What I have put down as A shall be A and
remain A!</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is now clear that subjectivism and autonomism in thinking
are rooted in the positive disregard of objective truth, in the
refusal of an unconditional subjection to it; they mean <emph>emancipation
from the truth</emph>. Here we have the most striking
and <emph>deepest difference</emph> between modern subjectivistic and
Christian objective thought. The latter adheres to the old conviction
that our thoughts do not make the truth, but are subject
<pb n='042'/><anchor id='Pg042'/>
to an objective order of things as a norm. For this reason
autonomous freedom and subjective caprice, a manner of
reasoning that would approach truth as a lawgiver, and even
change it according to time and circumstance, are unintelligible
in the Christian objective thought. This thought submits unselfishly
to truth wherever met, be it without a divine revelation
or with it, if the revelation be but vouched for. And the reward
of this unselfishness is the preservation of the truth.
</p>

<p>
But subjectivism, with its freedom, leads inevitably to the
loss of the truth; it is scepticism in principle, in fact, if
my thoughts are not a counterpart of an objective world, but
only a subjectively produced image; not knowledge of an external
reality, but only a figment of the imagination, a projection,
then I can have no assurance that they are more than
an empty dream.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Modern Separation of Knowledge and Faith.</head>

<p>
Of course it would be too much to expect that subjectivism
in modern thought and scientific work should go to the
very limit, viz., to disregard all reasoning, to advance at will any
theory whatever, to silence disagreeable critics by merely referring
to one's autonomy in thinking, and denying that any
one can attain to absolute truth. Errors in empirical speculation
never prosper as others do; the power of natural evidence
asserts itself at every step, and tears down the artificial
cobwebs of apparently scientific scepticism. It asserts
itself less strongly where the opposing power of natural evidence
is weaker, than is the case in matters of actual sense-experience.
Here indeed one sees the objective reality before
him, which he cannot fashion according to his caprice.
The astronomer has no thought of creating his own starry
sky, nor does the archæologist wish to create out of his own
mind the history of ancient nations. They both desire to
know and to reveal the reality. But in the <emph>suprasensible
sphere</emph>, in dealing with questions of the whence and whither of
human life, where there is question of religion and morals, there
autonomy and scepticism assert themselves as though they were
<pb n='043'/><anchor id='Pg043'/>
in their own country, there the free-thinker steps in, boasting
of his independence and taking for his motto the axiom of
ancient sophistry: the measure of all things is man.
</p>

<p>
Here at the same time the natural product of subjectivism,
sceptic agnosticism, has full sway. In such matters, we
are told, there is no certain truth; nothing can be proved,
nothing refuted: they are all matters of <emph>faith</emph>&mdash;not faith,
of course, in the Catholic sense. The latter is the acceptance
by reason of recognized divine testimony, hence an act of the
intellect. The modern so-called faith, on the contrary, is not
an act of the intellect, but is supposed to be a vague <emph>feeling</emph>,
a want, a longing and striving after the divine in one's innermost
soul, which divine is then to be grasped by the soul in
some mysterious way as something immediately present in it.
This feeling is said to emerge from the subconsciousness of the
soul, and to raise in the mind those images and symbols which
we encounter in the doctrines of the various religions, varying
according to times and men. They are only the symbols for that
unutterable experience of the divine, which can be as little
expressed by definitions and tenets as sounds can by colour. It
is a conviction of the ideal and divine, but different from the
conviction of reason; it is an inner, actual experience. Hence
there can no longer be absolute religious truth, no unchangeable
dogmas, which would have to be adhered to forever. In
religion, in views of the world and life, the free feeling of the
human subject holds sway, a feeling that experiences and weaves
together those thoughts and ideals that are in accord with his
individuality. This is the modern doctrine.
</p>

<p>
The dark mysticism of the ancient East and the agnosticism
of modern times here join hands. This modern method of
separating knowledge and faith is, as we all know, a prominent
feature of modern thought. Knowledge, that is, cognition by
reason, is said to exist only in the domain of the natural
sciences and history. Of what may be beyond these we can
have no true knowledge. Here, too, <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> has led the way; for
the important result of his criticism is his incessant injunction:
we can have true knowledge only of empiric objects, never of
things lying beyond the experience of the senses; our ideas are
<pb n='044'/><anchor id='Pg044'/>
merely subjective constructions of the reason which obtain weight
and meaning only by applying them to objects of sense experiment.
Hence God, immortality, freedom, and the like, remain
forever outside the field of our theoretical or cognitive reason.
Nevertheless <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> did not like to drop these truths. Hence he
constructed for himself a conviction of another kind. The
<q>practical reason</q> is to guide man's action in accomplishing the
task in which her more timid sister, theoretical reason, failed.
And it does it, too. It simply <q>postulates</q> these truths;
they are its <q><emph>postulates</emph>,</q> since without them moral life and
moral order, which it is bound to recognize, would be impossible.
No one knows, of course, whether this be truth, but it
ought to be truth. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Stat pro ratione voluntas.</foreign> The Gordian knot
is cut. <q>It is so,</q> the will now cries from the depths of the
soul, <q>I believe it</q>; while the intellect stands hesitatingly by
protesting <q>I don't know whether it is so or not.</q> Doubt
and conviction embrace each other; Yes and No meet peacefully.
<q>I had to suspend knowledge,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> suggests, <q>in order to
make room for faith</q> (Kritik der reinen Vernunft, 2. Vorrede).
<q>It is an exigency of pure practical reason based on duty,</q> he
further comments on his postulate, <q>to make something the
highest good, the object of my will, in order to further it with
all my power. Herein, however, I have to assume its possibility,
and therefore its conditions, viz., God, freedom, and immortality,
because I cannot prove them by speculative reason, nor yet
disprove them.</q> Thus <q>the just man may say I wish that
there be a God; I insist upon it, I will not have my faith taken
from me</q> (Kritik der prakt. Vernunft, 1. Teil, 2. Buch, 2
VIII).
</p>

<p>
Others have followed the lead of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>. For philosophers,
Protestant theologians, and modernists, he has become the pilot
in whom they trust.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q><hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> critical philosophy,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, <q>gives to knowledge
what belongs to it&mdash;the entire world of phenomena, for the freest investigation;
on the other hand, it gives to faith its eternal right, viz.,
the interpretation of life and the world according to their value</q>
(Immanuel Kant, 1898, 6). <q>Faith does not simply rest upon proofs,
but upon practical necessity</q>; <q>it does not come from the intellect,
but from the heart and will</q> (Einleitung in die Philosophie, 10th ed.,
<pb n='045'/><anchor id='Pg045'/>
1903, 271, 269). <q>Religion is not a science, hence it cannot be proved
nor disproved.</q> <q>Therefore man's view of the world does not depend on
the intellect, but solely on his will.... The ultimate and highest
truths, truths by which man lives and for which he dies, have not their
source in scientific knowledge, but come from the heart and from the
individual will.</q> In a similar strain <hi rend='italic'>R. Falkenberg</hi> writes: <q>The views
of the world growing out of the chronology of the human race, as
the blossoms of a general process of civilization, are not so much
thoughts as rhythms of thinking, not theories but views, saturated with
appreciations.... Not only optimism and pessimism, determinism and
doctrine of freedom, but also pantheism and individualism, idealism
and materialism, even rationalism and sensualism, have their
roots ultimately in the affections, and even while working with the
tools of reason remain for the most part matters of faith, sentiment,
and resolve</q> (Geschichte der neuen Philosophie, 5th ed., 1905,
p. 3).
</p>

<p>
You may look up any books or magazines of modern philosophy or
Protestant theology, and you will find in all of them <q>that faith is a
kind of conviction for which there is no need of proof</q> (<hi rend='italic'>H. Luedemann</hi>,
Prot. Monatshefte IX, 1903, 367). This emotional faith has been
introduced into Protestant theology especially by <hi rend='italic'>Schleiermacher</hi>. It
is also this view of the more recent philosophy that the modernists
have adopted. They themselves confess: <q>The <emph>modernists</emph> in accord
with modern psychology distinguish clearly between knowledge and
faith. The intellectual processes which lead to them appear to the
modernists altogether foreign to and independent of one another. This
is one of our fundamental principles</q> (Programma dei Modernisti
(1908), 121).
</p>

<p>
Religious instruction for children will then have to become altogether
different. The demand is already made for <q>a recast of thought
from the sphere of the intellect into the sphere of affection.</q> Away,
so they clamour, away with the dogmas of creation, of Christ as
the Son of God, of His miracles, as taught in the old schools! For
all these are religious ideas. Pupils of the higher grades should be
told <q>the plain truth about the degree of historicity in elementary
religious principles.... The fundamental idea of religion can neither
be created nor destroyed by teaching, it has its seat in sentiment, like&mdash;excuse
the term&mdash;an insane idea</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Fr. Niebergall</hi>, Christliche Welt,
1909, p. 43).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This dualism of <q>faith</q> and knowledge is as untenable as
it is common. It is a psychological <emph>impossibility</emph> as well as
a sad <emph>degradation of religion</emph>.
</p>

<p>
How can I seriously believe, and seriously hold for true, a view
of the world of which I do not know whether it be really true,
when the intellect unceasingly whispers in my ear: it is all imagination!
As long as faith is a conviction so long must it be an
activity of the intellect. With my feeling and will I may indeed
<pb n='046'/><anchor id='Pg046'/>
wish that something be true; but to wish simply that there
be a God is not to be convinced that there actually is a God.
By merely longing and desiring I can be as little convinced
as I can make progress in virtue by the use of my feet, or
repent of sins by a toothache. It is μετάβασις εἰς ἄλλο γένος.
A dualism of this kind, between head and heart, doubt and
belief, between the No of the mind and the Yes of the
heart, is a process incompatible with logic and psychology.
How could such a dualism be maintained for any length of
time? It may perhaps last longer in one in whom a vivid
imagination has dimmed the clearness of intellect; but where
the intellectual life is clear, reason will very soon emancipate
itself from a deceptive imagination. One may go on dreaming
of ideal images, but as soon as the intellect awakens they vanish.
Hallucinations are taken for real while the mind is affected,
but they pass away the moment it sees clearly.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> himself, the father of modern agnostic mysticism, has made
it quite clear that his postulates of faith concerning the existence of
God and the immortality of the soul, have never taken in him the
place of earnest conviction. Thus in the first place <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> holds that
there are no duties towards God, since He is merely a creature of our
mind. <q>Since this idea proceeds entirely from ourselves, and is a
product of ours, we have here before us a postulated being towards
whom we cannot have an obligation; for its reality would have to be
proved first by experience (or revealed)</q>; but <q>to have religion is
a duty man owes to himself.</q> Again, he dislikes an oath, he asks
whether an oath be possible and binding, since we swear only on condition
that there is a God (without, however, stipulating it, as did
<hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi>). And he thinks that <q>in fact all oaths taken honestly
and discreetly have been taken in no other sense</q> (Metaphysik der
Sitten, II, § 18, Beschluss).
</p>

<p>
<emph>Prayer</emph> he dislikes still more. <q>Prayer,</q> he says, <q>as an internal
form of cult, and therefore considered as a means of grace, is a superstitious
delusion (feticism).... A hearty wish to please God in all
our actions, that is, a disposition present in all our actions to perform
them as if in the service of God, is a spirit of prayer that can and
ought to be our perpetual guide.</q> <q>By this desire, the spirit of prayer,
man seeks to influence only himself; by prayer, since man expresses
himself in words, hence outwardly, he seeks to influence God. In the
former sense a prayer can be made with all sincerity, though man does
not pretend to assert the existence of God fully established; in the
latter form, as an address, he assumes this highest Being as personally
present, or at least pretends that he is convinced of its presence, in
the belief that even if it should not be so it can do him no harm, on
<pb n='047'/><anchor id='Pg047'/>
the contrary it may win him favour; hence in the latter form of actual
prayer we shall not find the sincerity as perfect as in the former. The
truth of this last remark any one will find confirmed when he imagines
to himself a pious and well-meaning man, but rather backward in
regard to such advanced religious ideas, surprised by another man while,
I will not say praying aloud, but only in an attitude of prayer; any one
will expect, without my saying so, that that man will be confused, as
if he were in a condition of which he ought to be ashamed. But why
this? A man caught talking aloud to himself raises at once the suspicion
that his mind is slightly deranged; and not altogether wrongly,
because one would seem out of mind if found all alone making
gestures as though he had somebody else before him; that, however, is
the case in the example given</q> (Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der
blossen Vernunft, 4. Stueck, 2, § 4, Allgemeine Anmerkung). Thus it
happens that in his opinion those who have advanced in perfection cease
to pray.
</p>

<p>
Nor does it seem that <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> is serious about his postulate of the
<emph>immortality</emph> of the soul. Asked by <hi rend='italic'>Lacharpe</hi> what he thought of the
soul, he did not answer at first, but remarked, when the question was repeated:
<q>We must not make too much boast of it</q> (<hi rend='italic'>H. Hettner</hi>,
Literat. Gesch. des 18. Jahrh., III, 4. ed., 3, p. 26. From <hi rend='italic'>Varnhausen's</hi>
Denkwuerdigkeiten).
</p>

<p>
Thousands have with <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> destroyed their religious conviction by
a boastful scepticism, and, like him, finally given it up to replace its
lack by artificial autosuggestions.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
And is not the religious life of man thereby made completely
valueless? The highest truths on which the mind of man
lives, and which from the first stage of his existence not only
interested but deeply stirred him, become fiction, pictures of
the fancy, suggestions of an effeminate mind, that cannot
make a lasting impression on stronger minds. And how can
the products of autosuggestion give comfort and strength in
hours of need and trial? It is true they do not impose any
obligations. Every one is free to form his own notions of life;
they are not to be taken seriously anyway, whether they be this
or that; they are all equally true and equally false. Buddhism
is just as true as Christianity, Materialism as true as Spiritualism,
Mohammedanism as true as Quakerism, the wisdom of the
Saints as true as the philosophy of the worldly. <q>The most
beautiful flower is growing on the same soil (that of the emotions)
with the rankest weed</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi>). The decision rests
with sentiments which admit of no arguing. Thus all is made
over to scepticism, to that constant doubting which degrades
<pb n='048'/><anchor id='Pg048'/>
and unnerves the higher life of modern times, to that <emph>modern
agnosticism</emph> which, though bearing the distinction of aristocratic
reserve, is in reality dulness and poverty of intellect; not
a perfection of the human intellect, but a hideous disease, all the
more dangerous because difficult to cure. It is the neurasthenia
of the intellect of which the physical neurasthenia of our
generation is the counterpart.
</p>

<p>
The distinguishing mark between man and the lower animals
has ever been held to be that the former could knowingly step
beyond the sphere of the senses, into that world of which his
intellect is a part. The conviction has always prevailed that
man by means of his own valid laws of thought, for instance, the
principle of causality, could safely ascend from the visible world
to an invisible one. Thus also the physician concludes the interior
cause of the disease from the exterior symptoms, the
physicist thus comes to the knowledge of the existence of atoms
and ions which he has never seen, and the astronomer calculates
with <hi rend='italic'>Leverrier</hi> the existence and location of stars which no eye
has yet detected.
</p>

<p>
One thing has certainly been established: a <emph>free sentiment</emph>
can now assert itself with sovereignty in the most important
spheres of intellectual life, without any barriers of
stationary truths and immovable Christian dogmas; one is now
free to fashion his religion and ideals to suit the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>individuum
ineffabile</foreign>. The latter asks no longer what religion demands
of him, but rather how religion can serve his purposes. <q>For
the gods,</q> it is said, <q>which we now acknowledge, are those
we need, which we can use, whose demands confirm and
strengthen our own personal demands and those of our fellow-men....
We apply thereby only the principle of elimination
of everything unsuitable to man, and of the survival of the fittest,
to our own religious convictions</q>; <q>we turn to that religion
which best suits our own individuality</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. James</hi>). Arrogant
doubt can now undermine all fundamental truths of Christian
faith until they crumble to pieces; beside it rises the free
genius of the new religion, on whose emblem the name of God
is no longer emblazoned, but the glittering seal of an independent
humanity.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='049'/><anchor id='Pg049'/>

<div>
<head>Relative Truth.</head>

<p>
Freedom of thought appears still more justified when we take
a further step which brings us to the <emph>consequence of subjectivism</emph>;
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, when we advance so far as to assert that there are
no unchangeable and in this sense no absolute truths, but only
temporary, changeable, relative truths. And modern thought
does profess this: there is no absolute truth, no <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>religio et philosophia
perennis</foreign>; different principles and views are justified
and even necessary for different times and even classes. This
removes another barrier to freedom of thought, viz., allegiance to
generally accepted truths and to the convictions of bygone ages.
</p>

<p>
The logicalness of this further step can hardly be denied.
If the human intellect, independent of the laws of objective truth,
fashions its own object and truth, especially in things above the
senses, why can it not form for itself, at different periods and in
different stages of life, a different religion and another view of
the world? Cannot the human subject pass through different
phases? He indeed changes his costume and style of architecture;
why not also his thoughts? Every product of thought
would then be the right one for the time, but would be untenable
for a further stage of his intellectual genesis and growth, and
would have to be replaced by a new one. The nature of subjectivistic
thought is no longer an obstacle to this. Besides, we
have the modern idea of <emph>evolution</emph>, already predominant in
all fields: the world, the species of plants and animals, man
himself with his whole life, his language, right, family, all of
them the products of a perpetual evolution, everything constantly
changing. Why not also his religion, morality, and view
of the world? They are only reflexes of a temporary state
of civilization. Hence also here motion and change, evolution
into new shapes!
</p>

<p>
Therefore, so it is said, we have now broken definitely with
the <q>dogmatic method of reasoning</q> of the belief in revelation,
and of scholastic philosophy which adhered to absolute
truth. They are replaced by the historical-genetical reasoning of
the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>saeculum historicum</foreign> which <q>has discarded absolute truth:
there are only relative, no eternal truths</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, Immanuel
<pb n='050'/><anchor id='Pg050'/>
Kant, 1898, 389). We are further assured that <q>this
treatment of the history of thought prevails in the scientific
world; the Catholic Church alone has not adopted it. She
still clings to dogmatic reasoning, and that is natural to her;
she is sure that she is in possession of the absolute truth</q>
(Idem, Philosophia militans, 2d ed., 1901, 5). Outside of
this Church every period of time is free to construct its
own theories, which will eventually go with it as they came
with it.
</p>

<p>
We meet this relative truth, and all the indefinable hazy
notions identified with it, <emph>in all spheres</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The modern history of philosophy and religion concedes to every
system and religion the right to their historic position: they are necessary
phases of evolution. The notion of immutable problems and truths
by which any system of thought would have to be measured has been
lost. <q>The appearance and rejection of a system,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>J. E.
Erdmann</hi>, <q>is a necessity of world-history. The former was demanded
by the character of the time which the system reflected, the latter
again is demanded by the fact that the time has changed</q> (Grundriss
der Geschichte der Philosophie, 3rd, I, 1878, 4). And Professor <hi rend='italic'>Eucken</hi>
says: <q>Despite all its advantages, such a view and construction of life
is not a definite truth, it remains an attempt, a problem that always
causes new discord among minds</q> (Grundlinien einer neuen Lebensanschauung,
1907, 2). <q>Thus, if according to <hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi> the coming into being
constitutes the truth of being, the ideals and aims also must share in
the mobility, and truth becomes a child of the times (<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>veritas temporis
filia</foreign>). That apparently subjects life to a full-blown relativism, but
such a relativism has lost all its terror by the deterioration of the
older method of reasoning. For agreement with existing truth is no
longer its chief object.</q> (Geistige Stroemungen der Gegenwart, 1904,
p. 197). The new theory of knowledge assures us quite generally: <q>It
is a vain attempt to single out certain lasting primitive forms of consciousness,
acknowledged constant elements of the mind, to retain
them. Every <q>a-priori</q> principle which is thus maintained as an unalienable
dowry of thought, as a necessary result of its psychological and
physiological <q>disposition,</q> will prove an obstacle of which the progress
of science will steer clear sooner or later</q> (<hi rend='italic'>E. Cassirer</hi>, Das Erkenntnissproblem
in der Philosophie und Wissenschaft der neueren Zeit,
1906, 6).
</p>

<p>
That this relativism is also laying hand, more and more firmly, upon
modern ethics is well known. One often gets the conviction that, as
<hi rend='italic'>E. Westermark</hi> teaches, <q>there is no absolute standard of morality,</q>
that <q>there are no general truths,</q> <q>that all moral values,</q> as Prof. <hi rend='italic'>R.
Broda</hi> writes, <q>are relative and varying with every people, every civilization,
every society, every free person</q> (Dokumente des Fortschritts,
1908, 362).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='051'/><anchor id='Pg051'/>

<p>
Thus modern subjectivism has lost all sense for definite rules
of thought; in its frantic rush for freedom and in its confused
excitement it seeks to upset all barriers. Now, of course, we may
disregard convictions thousands of years old, by simply observing
that they suited former ages but not the present; that they
perhaps suit the uneducated but not the educated. Henceforth
one may also reject the dogmas of <emph>Christianity</emph> by
merely pointing out that they were at one time of importance,
but are not suited to the modern man. That is an idea readily
grasped, one which has already become quite general with
those who are mentally tired of Christianity. What is demanded
is a further evolution also of the Christian religion, a continuous
cultivation of freer, higher forms, an undogmatic Christianity
without duty to believe, without a Church: nothing else, in
the end, but a veiled humanitarian religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It will be difficult for coming generations to understand,</q> says
<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, in the same sense, <q>how our time could cling in religious instruction
with such peace of mind to a system which, having originated
several centuries ago under entirely different conditions of intellectual
life, stands in striking contrast to facts and ideas accepted by our time
everywhere outside the schools.</q> Hence a revision of the fundamental
truths of Christianity is needed. Away with everything supernatural
and miraculous, obedience to faith, original sin, redemption:
all this sounds strange to the modern man. <q>So there remains but one
way: to adapt the doctrine of the Church to the theories and views
of our times</q> (System der Ethik, 8th ed., 1906, II, pp. 247, 250).
And <hi rend='italic'>Eucken</hi> says similarly: <q>We can adopt the doctrinal system of the
Church only by retiring from the present back to the past</q> (Zeitschr.
fuer Philosophie u. Phil. Kritik 112, 1898, 165). Therefore we demand
evolution of the Christian religion! <q>Let us not blindly follow antiquated
doctrines disposed of by science,</q> we are exhorted. <q>Let
there be no fear lest our belief in God and true piety suffer by it!
Let us remember that everything earthly is in continual motion, carried
along by the rushing river of life.</q> Onward, therefore, to advancement!
... cheerfully avowing the watchword: <q>evolution of religion</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Fr. Delitzsch</hi>, Zweiter Vortrag ueber Babel u. Bibel, 45. thousand,
1904, 42).
</p>

<p>
Modern Protestant theology has achieved a great deal in this direction;
its evolution has progressed to a complete disintegration of Christianity,
by adapting it to modern ideas so thoroughly that there is not a
single thought left which this Christianity, reduced to meaningless
words, might not accept.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This is the relativism of the present subjectivistic reasoning
and its consequences.
</p>

<pb n='052'/><anchor id='Pg052'/>

<p>
Now, it is true that there is room for a certain relativity
and evolution in the field of thought and truth. There is a
relative truth in the sense that our knowledge of it is never exhaustive.
Even the eternal truths of the Christian religion we
always know only imperfectly, and we ought to perfect our
knowledge continually; established facts of history can also be
known, if studied, in greater detail. Thus there is progress
and evolution. But from this we may not conclude that
there can be no fixed truths at all. In the astronomy of to-day
one can surely have the conviction that the fundamental truths
of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus's</hi> System of the Universe must remain an unchangeable
truth, and that the time will never come when we
shall go back to the obsolete doctrines of old <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi>, who made
the sun revolve around the earth. Is astronomy therefore
excluded from progress and evolution? It is moreover true
that the individual as well as the community pass through an
intellectual evolution in the sense that they gradually increase
their knowledge and correct their errors, that literature and the
schools gradually enhance the energy and wealth of our ideas
and thoughts.
</p>

<p>
But a progressive change of the laws of thought, to the effect
that we must now hold to a proposition which at another time
we should naturally reject as untenable, can be maintained only
upon the supposition that the thought of evolution has driven
all others out of the intellect. It would be absurd to hold that
the same view could be true at one time and false at another, that
the same views about the world and life could be right to-day
and wrong to-morrow, to be accepted to-day and rejected to-morrow.
A view is either true or false. If true, it is always
true and warranted. Or was old <hi rend='italic'>Thales</hi> right when he declared
the world to consist of water; were <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> right
in maintaining that it consisted of ideas, or forms, with real
existences; was <hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi> and his time right with his Ego, and
are finally <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> right in claiming
the world to be the work of the will? Were our heroic ancestors
right, as the theories of evolution claim, in holding that
trees are inhabited by ghosts; were then the Greeks right with
their idea of a host of gods dwelling in the Olympus; and later
<pb n='053'/><anchor id='Pg053'/>
on, was the civilized world right in holding that there is but one
God, a personal one; and, after that, are many others of to-day
right when they tell us that the world, and nature itself, is god?
These are conclusions that threaten confusion to the human
brain. And yet they are the logical consequences of <q>relative
truth,</q> and any one reluctant to accept these consequences
would prove thereby that he has never realized what absurdities
are marketed as relative truth.
</p>

<p>
Or shall we give it up, as entirely impossible, to judge of
the truth or falseness of doctrines and views? Are we to
value them only so far as they are adapted to a period, and as
moulding and benefiting that period? This opinion indeed is
held. <q>The values of science and philosophy,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>,
<q>of our arts and poetry, consist in what they give us; whether
a distant future will still use them is very questionable.
Scholastic philosophy has passed away; we use it no longer;
that is, however, no proof against its value; if it has made the
generations living in the latter half of the Middle Ages more
intelligent and wise ... then it has done all that could rightfully
be expected of it: having served its purpose, it may be laid
with the dead: there is no philosophy of enduring value.</q>
<q>Whatever new ideas a people produces from its own inner
nature will be beneficial to it. Nature may be confidently expected
to produce here and everywhere at the right time what
is proper and necessary</q> (System der Ethik, 8th ed., 1906, I,
339, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>, II, 241).
</p>

<p>
We have here a very deplorable misconception of the real value
of truth, degrading it to suit passing interests and to promote
them. This also is in conformity with subjectivism. But
what could be answered to the straight question: suppose
the opinions which some prefer to call <q>false</q> are more useful
and valuable than <q>truth</q>? None but <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> had the
courage to say that <q>the falsity of a judgment is not yet a
sufficient prejudice against it; here our new speech will
perhaps sound strangest. The question is: How far is that
judgment life-promoting, life-sustaining, preservative, even creative
of species, and we are inclined, on principle, to say that the
falsest judgments are to us the most indispensable</q> (Jenseits
<pb n='054'/><anchor id='Pg054'/>
von Gut und Boese, I, 4, W. W. VII, 12.) The view that doctrines
and opinions become especially or exclusively true and
valuable by their usefulness for practical life, has become in our
times the principle of pragmatism.
</p>

<p>
What others thought out only half way, <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> reasons out
to the end.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To what lengths this contempt of objective truth may lead a man of
such an honest character as <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, is learned from his advice to
the modern Protestant preacher who can no longer believe what he
has to preach to his orthodox congregation: he may speak just as
suits his congregation, orthodox as well as unorthodox, according to
the principles of relative truth. <q>Let us assume,</q> he says, <q>that his
congregation is of a remote country village, where not the slightest
report of the happenings in theology and literature has penetrated,
where the names of <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Renan</hi> are as little heard as those
of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Schleiermacher</hi>. Here the Bible is still taken to be the
literal Word of God, transmitted to us by holy men commissioned to
do it. In this case the preacher may speak without scruple of that book
in the same way as his present hearers are used to. Would he
thus be saying what is wrong? What is meant by saying the Bible
is the Word of God? The same preacher, if transferred to other surroundings
where he has to address readers of <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, may
change his manner of speaking without changing his view or without
violating the truth one way or the other. He would be speaking to
them from their own point of view.... Again, should the same
preacher publish his philosophical scientific research, he could speak of
Holy Scripture in an entirely different way....</q> And he adds:
<q>Some have taken exception to this opinion.</q> Surely not without
reason!
</p>

<p>
A justification of this counsel was attempted in these words:
</p>

<p>
<q>Just as the electric incandescent light and the tallow-candle may
exist side by side, and as each of them may serve its purpose in its
proper place, so there exist also side by side various physical and
metaphysical ideas and fundamental notions: the scientist and the
philosopher and the old grandmother in her cottage on the remote
mountain-side, cannot think of the world in the same way</q> (Ethik
II, 240-244). But the argument, if it should prove anything, must
be formulated thus: <q>As the incandescent light can at the same time be
a tallow-candle, just so can two different and opposite views about one
and the same thing be at the same time both right.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus, thanks to the science of modern subjectivism, every
fixed and unchangeable truth, especially in the sphere of philosophy
and religion, is removed, and with it also every barrier to
freedom of thought in science as well as elsewhere. The human
<pb n='055'/><anchor id='Pg055'/>
intellect in its autonomous self-consciousness may not only
reject those truths which are proposed by revelation or the
Church; it may not only experience its views of religion and
the world by giving free activity to its feelings, it also knows that
to be no longer satisfied with the old truths means to be
progressive.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
Above we have sketched the deeper-lying thoughts on which
the liberal freedom of science is based; it is the humanitarian
view of the world with its emancipation of man, and autonomous
scepticism in thought, joined to that sceptical disregard
of truth which once the representative of expiring pagan
antiquity comprised in the words: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quid est veritas?</foreign> Now we
also understand better the liberal science which often claims
the privilege of being <q>the</q> science, and which only too often
likes to put down as unwarranted and inferior every other science
that does not pursue its investigations in the same way.
We understand its methods of thought in philosophy and religion,
for which it claims an exclusive privilege; we can also
form a judgment of its claim to be the leader of humanity in
place of faith.
</p>

<p>
No doubt there are many who are flirting with this freedom
without accepting its principles entirely. They do not reason
out the thing to the end, they argue against the invasion of the
Church into the field of science, and point to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>; they
denounce Index and Syllabus, and then believe they have therewith
exhausted the meaning of freedom of science. That the
real matter in question is a view of the world diametrically opposed
to the Christian view, that a changed theory of cognition
is underlying it, is by many but insufficiently realized.
</p>

<p>
This freedom is not acceptable to one who professes the
Christian view of the world. He will not offer any feeble apology
to the eulogist of this freedom, as, for instance: Indeed
you are quite right about your freedom, but please remember
that I, too, as a faithful Christian am entitled to profess freedom.
No; the answer can only be: Freedom, yes; but <emph>this</emph>
freedom, no. A wholly different view of the world separates
me from it. I see in it not freedom but rebellion, not the
<pb n='056'/><anchor id='Pg056'/>
rights of man but upheaval, not a real boon of mankind but
real danger.
</p>

<p>
The principle of liberalism has in the field of social economy
already done enough to wreck man's welfare. It has here
proved its incompetence as a factor of civilization. That in
science also, where it is active in the field of philosophy
and religion, liberalism is the principle of overthrowing true
science, without any appreciation for truth and human nature,
that it is a principle of intellectual pauperism and decay, that
it despoils man of his greatest treasures, inherited from better
centuries&mdash;this we shall prove conclusively.
</p>

<p>
It is difficult to say how long the high tide of liberalism will
sweep over the fields of modern intellectual life before it subsides.
One thing, however, is certain, that just so long it will
remain a danger to Christian civilization, and to the intellectual
life of mankind.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='057'/><anchor id='Pg057'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Second Section. Freedom of Research and Faith.</head>

<pb n='059'/><anchor id='Pg059'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Research And Faith In General.</head>

<div>
<head>Introduction.</head>

<p>
When the youth growing to maturity begins to feel the
development of his own strength, it may happen that he
finds his dependence on home unbearably trying. Perhaps he
will say, <q>Father, give me the portion of substance that falleth
to me,</q> and then depart into a strange country.
</p>

<p>
The men of Europe have for centuries lived in the Christian
religion as in their fathers' house, and have fared well. But
to many children of our time the old homestead has become
too confining. Modern man, we are told, has at last come to his
senses. He wants to develop his personality, thoughts, and sentiments
freely, independently of every authority. He turns his
back on his father's house. His parting words are the accusation:
The old Church <q>opposes the modern principles of free
individuality, the right to drain the cup of one's own reason
and personal life, and it sets itself against the whole of modern
feeling, investigation, and activity</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Th. Ziegler</hi>, Gesch.
der Ethik, II, 2d ed., 1892, p. 589).
</p>

<p>
We are already acquainted with this freedom. We approach
now the main question: What is the true relation of the freedom,
which man may rightly claim for his scientific activity and
reason, to external laws and regulations? Is man really justified
to reject them all on the plea that they degrade his intellect
and are an obstacle to his development, or does this rejection
but manifest an error into which his desire of freedom
has decoyed him? This is the question, it will be remembered,
that we reached soon in the beginning of our investigation.
We have already found the categorical answer&mdash;an emphatic
rejection of such justification; we also traced the hypotheses on
<pb n='060'/><anchor id='Pg060'/>
which the answer rests. We now return to the question to
discuss it in principle. We begin with the freedom of scientific
<emph>research</emph>, in order to take up afterwards the freedom in
<emph>teaching</emph>.
</p>

<p>
What are those external powers that may interrupt or caution
the scientist in his investigations and problems? Here we
do not yet consider the scientist as a teacher, communicating to
the public the result of his investigation, his ideas and views,
from the university chair to his scientific audience, or to a
wider circle of hearers by means of publications; we here regard
him in his private study only, in the pursuit of which he perhaps
encounters new questions, and new solutions suggest themselves
to him. What freedom can he and must he enjoy here?
This private freedom must evidently be judged from a point of
view other than that from which the freedom in teaching should
be judged. With the latter, the interests of his contemporaries
must be taken into account, and the question must be considered,
whether they suffer by such teaching. The freedom of the
scientist is greater than that of the teacher. Moreover, research
is the principal and most important activity of science:
nothing, surely, is taught that has not been previously investigated.
If, therefore, research is in any way restricted, so also is
teaching; but not <hi rend='italic'>vice versa</hi>. Are there, then, exterior authorities
that may restrain research and reasoning, and what are
they?
</p>

<p>
One who lives in the Christian world knows at once of what
authority to think. It is not the state. The state cannot directly
influence the private work of the student: if it may exert
its influence directly upon anything, it is only upon freedom in
teaching. No, the authority to think of is the authority of
the faith, revealed religion and its guardian, the Church.
</p>

<p>
Of course, this is not the only authority. Even if a revelation
from heaven had not been given us, yet those <emph>general convictions
of mankind</emph>, common to all nations and times, of the
immutability of the laws of thought and morality, of the existence
of a supramundane God, of the retribution for moral
conduct to be made in the world to come, of the sanctity of
state-authority, of the necessity of private property, and others,
<pb n='061'/><anchor id='Pg061'/>
would ever remain most revered utterances of truth. No one
would be allowed to contradict this avowal of all mankind,
relying on his own reasoning, which he calls science, and give
the lie to the reasoning of all other men, in order to make
his own reason the sole measure of truth.
</p>

<p>
But for the present let us pass over the natural authority
of mankind, of its convictions and traditions. It is surpassed
and replaced by the <emph>authority of faith</emph> which belongs to <emph>our
Christian religion</emph>. The latter comes to us claiming to possess
the only true view of the world, and laying upon us the
obligation of accepting it. It has even the courage to put its
anathema upon propositions which the scientist may call science;
it dares write out a list of the propositions which it condemns
as untenable. Against this authority the protest is raised:
Where is freedom of research, if one cannot even indulge
in his own ideas, if the intellect is to be cropped and fettered?
What is to become of frank, unprejudiced investigation, if I am
from the outset bound to certain propositions, if from the outset
the result at which I must arrive is already determined? It is
intellectual bondage that the man of faith is languishing in.
Thus reads the indictment; thus sounds the battle-cry. Is the
indictment justified? Can and shall science take faith as
a guide in many instances without detriment to its own innate
freedom? And where, and when?
</p>

<p>
First, the more general question: Is freedom of research
compatible with the duty to believe, or do they exclude each
other in principle?
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What Faith is Not.</head>

<p>
What, then, is faith, and what does the duty to believe demand
of us?
</p>

<p>
Here we meet at once with a false proposition which the opponents
of the Christian faith will not abandon. To them faith
is always a blind assent, in giving which one does not ask, nor
dare ask, whether the proposition be true&mdash;<emph>a belief without
personal conviction</emph>. According to them the believer holds
himself <q>captive to the teaching of his Church. He cannot reflect
personally, but follows blindly the lead of authority and
<pb n='062'/><anchor id='Pg062'/>
force of habit.</q> Thus <q>Catholicism is the religion of bondage</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>W. Wundt</hi>, Ethik, 3d ed., 1903, II, 255, 254). To them it is but
an <q>uncritical submission to the existing authority, uninfluenced
either by the testimony of the senses or the reflection of
the intellect</q> (<hi rend='italic'>K. Menger</hi>, Neue Freie Presse, 24 Nov., 1907).
The campaign for liberal science is denouncing those who
<q>even to-day dare to demand blind faith,</q> <q>without proof or
criticism,</q> faith in the <q>word of the Popes and men pretending
to be interpreters and emissaries of God, men who have
proved their incompetence and inability by the physical and
religious coercion to which they have subjected mankind</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>T. G. Masaryk</hi>, V boji o nábozenstvi, The Battle for Religion,
1904, p. 10, 23).
</p>

<p>
To be sure, if the Christian faith were such, it would be intellectual
slavery. If I am compelled to believe something of
which I cannot know the truth, this is coercion, and conflicts
with the nature of the intellect and its right to truth. Infidelity
would then be liberation. But faith is <emph>not</emph> that.
</p>

<p>
As a rule this view is based on a presumption, which has
already been extensively discussed, viz., that faith and religion
have nothing at all to do with intellectual activity, but are
merely the <emph>product of the heart</emph>, a sentimental, freely acting
notion; for, of metaphysical objects no human intellect
can form a certain conviction. It is subjectivism that leads to
this view. According to it the subject creates its own world of
thought, free in action and feeling, not indeed everywhere,&mdash;in
the sphere of sense-experience the evidence of the concrete is
too great,&mdash;but at least in the sphere of metaphysical truth.
</p>

<p>
Such modes of expression find their way also into Catholic
literature and language; even here we meet with the assertion
that religion is a matter of the heart, and for that very reason
has nothing to do with science. On the whole it is a remarkable
fact that among believing men many expressions are current
that have been coined in the mint of modern philosophy, and
have there received a special significance. They are used without
real knowledge of their origin and purposed meaning; but the
words do not fail to colour their ideas, and to create imperceptibly
a strange train of thought.
</p>

<pb n='063'/><anchor id='Pg063'/>

<p>
One who is of the opinion that religion and views of the
world are but sentiment and feeling, which change with one's personality
and individuality, can, of course, no longer understand
a dogmatic Christianity and the obligation to hold fast to clearly
defined dogmas as unchangeable truth. I can hold dogmas and
doctrinal decisions to be unquestionably true only when I can
<emph>convince myself of their credibility</emph> by the judgment of my
reason. If I cannot do that, and am still bound to believe
them, without the least doubt, then such obedience is compulsory
repression of the reason. Then it would indeed be necessary
for the Church, as <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> says, <q>to instil into its flock a pious
dread of the least deviation from certain articles of faith based
on history, and a dread of all investigation, to such a degree
that they dare not let a doubt rise, even in thought, against the
articles proposed for their belief, because this would be tantamount
to lending an ear to the evil spirit</q> (Religion innerhalb
der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft, 3. Stueck, 2. Abtlg.). Fixed
dogmas may then at the very most, according to the great
master of modern thought, be of pedagogic value to a
minor, until he be grown to maturity. But to more advanced
minds must be unconditionally conceded the freedom to construct
dogmas as they think best, viz., as symbols and images
for the subjective thought they underlie. This also, as is well
known, is an article of Modernism, which here again follows in
the steps of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Ecclesiastical faith,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, <q>may be useful as a vehicle to
minors who can grasp a purely rational religion only through symbols,
until in the course of time, owing to the general enlightenment, they
can with the consent of everybody exchange the form of degrading
means of coercion for an ecclesiastical form suitable to the dignity of
a moral religion&mdash;that of free faith.</q> <q>The membranes,</q> he says
in another place, <q>in which the embryo first shaped itself into man
must be cast off, if he is to see the light of day. The apron-strings of
sacred tradition with its appendages, viz., the statutes and observances
which at one time did good service, can gradually be dispensed with;
they may even become a harmful hindrance when one is growing to
manhood.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Of course, to him who takes the position of <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> <emph>dualism
of belief and rational judgment</emph>, freedom from every authority
<pb n='064'/><anchor id='Pg064'/>
in matters of faith, and in this sense tolerance, will
appear to be self-evident. Whatever has nothing to do with
knowledge, but is merely the personal result of an inner, subjective
experience, cannot be offered by external authority as matter
for instruction. The sole standard for this belief is the autonomous
subject and its own needs. In this sense <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> tells
us: <q>The kernel of one's being is to be grasped in its own
depths and the soul is merely to recognize its own needs and the
road traced out for their gratification. This can only be done
with the fullest freedom. Any restraint here is tantamount to
the destruction of the problem; any submission to the teaching
of others ... is treason to one's own religion</q> (Religioeser
Glaube und freie Forschung. Neue Freie Presse, 7. Juni, 1908).
To have one's religion determined by any authority, even a
divine one, would be treason to the sovereignty of man!
</p>

<p>
Viewed from this standpoint, the <emph>reconciliation between
faith and science</emph> is no longer a problem. And they congratulate
themselves on the solution of this vexing question.
Now, they say, deliverance from an oppressive misery has been
found, now the peace sought for so long is restored. A fair
division has been made: two worlds, the world of the senses, and
the world above sense experience. One belongs to science, where
it now rules supreme; the other belongs to faith, where it can
move freely, undisturbed by, and even unapproachable to
science. Just as the stars in the sky are inaccessible to the custodian
of civil order,&mdash;he can neither support them nor hinder
them, nor pull them down,&mdash;just so the realm of faith is inaccessible
to science: peace reigns everywhere.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Cheered on by this treaty of peace, <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> writes: <q>Thus critical
philosophy has solved the old problem of the relation of knowledge to
faith. <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> is convinced that by properly setting the limits he has succeeded
in laying the foundation for real and enduring peace between
them. In fact, upon this in the first place will rest the importance and
vitality of his philosophy. It gives to knowledge, on the one hand, what
belongs to it for unlimited research, the whole world of phenomena; on
the other hand it gives to faith its eternal right, the interpretation of
life and the world from the view-point of values. There can be no doubt
that herein lies the cause of the great impression made by <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> upon
his time; he appeared as the liberator from unbearable suspense</q> (Immanuel
Kant, 1898, 6).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='065'/><anchor id='Pg065'/>

<p>
To a critical observer, such peace-making is utterly incomprehensible.
They probably did not consider that in this way
<emph>religion and faith</emph> were not liberated, but <emph>dispossessed</emph>; not
brought to a place of safety, but transferred from the realm of
reality into the realm of fancy. Similarly an aggressive ruler
might address a neighbouring prince thus: We cannot agree any
longer, let us make peace: you retain all your titles, and I shall
see to your decent support, but you will have to lay down your
crown and sovereignty and leave the country&mdash;in this way we
can have peace. Religion, once the greatest power in the life
of man, for the sake of which man made sacrifices and even
laid down his life, has now become a matter of sterile devotion;
it may, moreover, no longer claim power and importance; it
is now reduced to a poetic feeling, with which one can fill up
intellectual vacancies. No longer is man here for religion's sake;
religion is here for man's sake. A buttonhole flower, a poetic
perfume to sprinkle over his person. For he does not want to
give up religion entirely. <q>We are the less inclined to give up
religion forthwith, since we are prone to consider a religious disposition
as a prerogative of human nature, even as its noblest
title.</q> Thus <hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi>, when he asked of those who sympathized
with his opinions, Have we still religion? (Der alte u.
neue Glaube, II, n. 33). Of course religion has now become
something quite different; it has been <emph>consigned to deep
degradation</emph>.
</p>

<p>
To be sure, feeling is of great importance in religion. Dissatisfaction
with the things of this earth, man's longing for
something higher, for the Infinite, his craving for immortality,
for aid and consolation&mdash;are all naturally seeking for religious
truths. If these are known, they in turn arouse fear and hope,
love and gratitude; they become a source of happiness and inspiration.
But these feelings have no meaning unless we are
certain that there exists something corresponding to them; much
less could they of themselves be a conviction, just as little as
hunger could convince us that we have food and drink. If one
cannot perceive that there is a God, a Providence, a life beyond,
then religion sinks to the level of a hazy feeling, without
reason and truth, which must appear foolish to men who think,&mdash;as
<pb n='066'/><anchor id='Pg066'/>
<q>the great phantasmagoria of the human mind, which we
call religion</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>, Gedanken über Reform Katholizismus,
1902, 12),&mdash;which departs from the sphere of rational intellectual
life, and which many have even begun to contemplate
from the view-point of psychopathology. It is only due to the
after-effect of a more religious past that religion is suffered to
lead still a life of pretence: moral support in struggles it can
give no more, nor comfort in dark hours, much less may it presume
to guide man's thought. It stands far below science.
</p>

<p>
Despair of the possibility of knowing higher truths is confronting
us, the disease of deteriorating times and intellectually
decaying nations. But just as Christianity, once in
youthful vigour, went to the rescue of an old World dying of
scepticism, just as the Catholic Church has ever upheld the
rights of reason, especially against Protestantism, which from
its beginning has torn asunder faith and knowledge: so the
Catholic Church stands to this day unaffected by the doubting
tendency of our times, upholding the rights of reason. It also
upholds faith. But its faith has nothing to do with modern
agnosticism.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>What Faith Is.</head>

<p>
What, then, according to Catholic doctrine, is faith and the
duty to believe?
</p>

<p>
Let us briefly recall to mind the <emph>fundamental tenets</emph> of the
<emph>Christian religion</emph>. It tells us that even in the Old Testament,
but more especially in the New, through His Incarnate
Son, God has revealed to man all those religious and moral
truths which are necessary and sufficient for the attainment of
his supernatural end. Some of them are truths which reason
by itself could not discover; others it could discover, but only
by great labour. And this divine revelation demands belief.
Belief is natural to man. The child believes its parents, the
judge believes the witnesses, the ruler believes his counsellors.
God wished to meet man in this way, and to give him certainty
in regard to the highest truths.
</p>

<p>
But revelation was to be an heritage of mankind, it was to be
transmitted and laid unadulterated before all generations. For
<pb n='067'/><anchor id='Pg067'/>
this reason it could not be left unprotected to the vicissitudes of
time, or the arbitrary interpretation of the individual. It
would have utterly failed in its purpose of transmitting sure
knowledge of certain truth,&mdash;the history of Protestantism
proves this,&mdash;had it been given merely with the injunction:
Receive what I have committed to your keeping, and do with it
what you please. No, it had to be made secure against subjective,
arbitrary choice.
</p>

<p>
To this end Christ established an international organization,
the <emph>Church</emph>, and committed to it His Gospel as a means of
grace, together with the right and sacred duty to teach it to all
men in His Name, to keep inviolate the heirloom of revelation,
defending it against all error. <q>Going, therefore, teach ye all
nations</q> (Matt. xxviii. 19), was His command. <q>Go ye into
the whole world and preach the Gospel to every creature; he
that believeth and is baptized shall be saved, but he that believeth
not shall be condemned</q> (Mark xvi. 15). <q>He that
heareth you, heareth Me, and he that despiseth you, despiseth
Me</q> (Luke x. 16). <q>Behold, I am with you all days, even to
the consummation of the world</q> (Matt. xxviii. 20). He gave
His divine aid to the Church, in order that she might <emph>infallibly</emph>
keep His doctrine to the very end of time.
</p>

<p>
Thus the divine revelation and the Church approach all men
with the duty to believe: <q>he that believeth shall be saved,</q>
God gravely commands; <q>and if he will not hear the Church, let
him be to thee as the heathen and publican</q> (Matt. xviii. 17).
They lay their teachings before the human intellect, bidding it
retain them as indubitable truth, upon their infallible testimony,
yet only after convincing itself that God has really
spoken, and that this Church is the true one, which cannot err.
And only after having convinced itself of the credibility of the
proposed teaching is it obliged to believe. Hence, according to
the Christian mind, faith is the <emph>reasonable conviction of
the truth of what is proposed for belief, by reason of
an acknowledged infallible testimony</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Catholic dogma we find explained in the definition of the Vatican
Council, which had to expose so many errors that are liable in our days
to confuse the faithful in their notions of faith and Church. <q>This
<pb n='068'/><anchor id='Pg068'/>
faith,</q> says the Vatican Council (Sess. III, chap. 3), <q>which is the beginning
of human salvation, the Catholic Church teaches to be a supernatural
virtue, by which, through the inspiration and co-operation of the
grace of God, we believe to be true what He has revealed, not on account
of the intrinsic truth of it, perceived by the natural light of reason,
but on the authority of God who gives the revelation, who can neither
deceive nor be deceived.... Nevertheless, in order that the service of
our belief might be in accord with reason (<q>a reasonable service</q>) God
willed to unite to the internal helps of the Holy Ghost external proofs
of His revelation, to wit, external works divine, especially miracles and
prophecies, which, clearly demonstrating God's omnipotence and infinite
knowledge, are most certain signs of divine revelation and are suited to
the intelligence of all.</q> The Council adds expressly the canon: <q>If
any one say that divine revelation cannot be made credible by exterior
signs, and that men ought therefore to be moved to belief solely by their
interior experience or individual inspiration, let him be anathema.</q>
We have here stated the Catholic dogma as unanimously taught by all
Christian centuries, by all Fathers and theologians.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Hence, the act of faith by which I believe that the Son of
God became man, that I shall rise from the dead, is first of all
a <emph>judgment of the reason</emph>, not an act of the will, or a feeling
of the heart. It is, moreover, a <emph>certain</emph> rational judgment upon
weighty reasons, not, indeed, such which I draw from intellectual
knowledge, but those which rest upon the infallible
testimony of God. The act of faith agrees therefore with assent
to historic truth in that it is of the same kind of knowledge, but
upon the authority of infallible testimony. Just as I believe
that Alexander once marched victoriously through Asia, because
there is sure testimony to that effect, so I believe that I shall rise
from the dead, because God has revealed it. The difference
being that in the former case we have only human testimony,
whereas in the latter God Himself speaks. Thus, according to
Catholic teaching, faith and knowledge may be distinct from
each other, but in a sense quite different from that of the representatives
of modern, sentimental faith. The latter understand
knowledge, in this connection, to be any judgment of the reason
based upon evidence, and they deny that faith is such; but to
a Catholic, faith, too, is a <emph>judgment of the reason</emph>, and in this
sense true knowledge; only it is not knowledge in the more common
sense of a cognition derived from one's own mental activity
<emph>without</emph> the external means of authority.
</p>

<p>
As we have heard from the Vatican Council, it is the recognized
<pb n='069'/><anchor id='Pg069'/>
fact of divine revelation which bestows upon the matter
of faith its certainty in reason. Hence the knowledge of
this fact must precede faith itself. But the knowledge must be
certain, not merely a belief, for it is the very presupposition of
belief, but a knowledge, derived from the intellect, which may
at any time be traced back to scientific proofs if there is the
requisite philosophical training. So long as man is not certain
that God has spoken, he cannot have faith according to the
Catholic view. One of the sentences condemned by <hi rend='italic'>Innocent
XI.</hi>, to say nothing of other ecclesiastical testimonies, is this:
<q>The assent of supernatural faith, useful for salvation, can
exist with merely probable information of the fact of revelation,
even with the fear that God has not spoken.</q> And very
recently there has been condemned also the proposition: <q>The
assent of faith ultimately rests upon a sum of probabilities</q>
(Decretum Lamentabile, July 3, 1907. Sent. 25).
</p>

<p>
It cannot be our task here to show at length how the Christian
arrives at this certain knowledge. Our present purpose
is only to state the Catholic concept of faith. We have already
heard the Vatican Council refer to miracles and prophecies.
To most of the faithful the chief fact that offers them this
security is the wonderful phenomenon of the <emph>Catholic
Church</emph> itself, which proposes to them the doctrines of faith as
divine revelation.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus again the Vatican Council defines clearly: <q>To enable us to do
our duty in embracing the true faith and remaining in it steadfastly,
God has through His incarnate Son established the Church and set
plain marks upon His institution, in order that it may be recognized by
all as the guardian and interpreter of revelation. For only the Catholic
Church possesses all those arrangements, so various and wonderful, made
by God in order to demonstrate publicly the credibility of Christianity.
Indeed the Church of itself, because of its wonderful propagation, its
pre-eminent sanctity and inexhaustible fecundity in everything good, its
Catholic unity and invincible duration, is a grand permanent proof of
its credibility and irrefutable testimony in behalf of its divine mission.
Thus, like a 'standard unto the nations,' it invites those to come to it
who have not yet believed, and assures its children that the faith
they profess rests upon a most firm foundation.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Catholic looks with pride upon his Church: she has stood all
the trials of history. He sees her endure, though within harassed by
heresies and endangered by various unworthiness and incapacity of her
priests, and attacked incessantly from without by irreconcilable enemies,
<pb n='070'/><anchor id='Pg070'/>
yet prevailing victoriously through the centuries, blessing, converting
nations and beloved by them; while by her side worldly kingdoms,
supported by armies and weapons, go down into the grave of human
instability. The most wonderful fact in the world's history, contrary
to all laws of natural, historical events,&mdash;here a higher hand is plainly
thrust into human history; it is the fulfilment of the divine promise:
<q>I am with you all days, even to the consummation of the world.</q>
<q>The gates of hell shall not prevail against it.</q> He sees the Saints,
who have lived in this Church and have become saints through her,
those superhuman heroes of virtue, who far surpass the laws of human
capacity.
</p>

<p>
In the most widely different states of life in the Church he sees
virtue grow in the degree in which one submits to her guidance. He witnesses
the remarkable spectacle, that everything noble and good is attracted
by the Church, and their contrary repelled. He sees the miracles
which never cease in her midst. Finally he beholds her admirable unity
and vigorous faith; she alone holding firm to her teaching, not compromising
with any error; she alone holding fearlessly aloft the principle of
divine authority, and thus becoming a beacon to many who are seeking a
safe shelter from spiritual ruin. In addition we finally have that
harmony and grandeur of the truths of faith, and&mdash;perhaps not in the
last place&mdash;that calm and peace of mind, produced in the faithful soul
by a life led according to this faith, by prayer and the reception of
the Sacraments. This is a clear proof that where the Spirit of God
breathes there cannot be the seat of untruth.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These are sufficient proofs to produce even in the uneducated,
and in children, true and reasonable certainty, provided they
have had sufficient instruction in religion. It must, however,
be emphasized that this conviction produced by faith need <emph>not
first be gained by scientific investigation</emph> of the motives
of faith, or by minute or extensive theological studies. A wrong
notion of human knowledge frequently leads to the opinion that
there is no true certainty at all unless it is the result of scientific
study&mdash;a presumption on which is based the claim of freedom
of science to disregard any conviction, be it ever so sacred, and
the claim that it is reserved to science alone to attain the sure
possession of the truth. Later on we shall dwell more at length
upon this important point. Let it suffice here to remark that
the intellect can attain real certainty even without scientific
research; most of our convictions, which we all hold unhesitatingly
as true, are of this kind. They constitute a belief
that is based upon the real knowledge of the reason, which
knowledge is not, however, so clear and distinct that it could
be demonstrated easily in scientific form.
</p>

<pb n='071'/><anchor id='Pg071'/>

<p>
The certainty of faith, therefore, is based upon the knowledge
that God Himself vouches for the truth of the teachings of
faith. This relieves the faithful from the necessity of obtaining
by his own reflection an insight into the intrinsic reasons of the
why and the wherefore of the proposed truth, and to examine in
each instance the correctness of the thing. He knows that
God has revealed it, that His infallible Church vouches for it;
hence it is credible and true; that suffices for him, just as trustworthy
evidence suffices for the historian concerning facts which
he himself has not observed.
</p>

<p>
Let no one say that faith is a <emph>blind belief</emph> and blind obedience,
and that dogmatic Christianity, or, to use another
phrase, <q>the religion of the law, demands first of all obedience:
it is true it would like, besides that, an interior assent for its
thoughts and commandments, but where this is lacking the law
itself furnishes the ways and means to compensate the lack of
this internal assent, if only obedience is there</q> (<hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi>,
Religioeser Glaube u. freie Forschung. Neue Freie Presse, June
7, 1908). Nor let any one say that free research has <q>at least
this advantage over dogma, that its claims can be proved,
which is not true of the other's claims</q> (<hi rend='italic'>J. H. van't Hoff</hi>, ibid.,
Dec. 29, 1907). These are misrepresentations.
</p>

<p>
There is no obedience to faith which is not <emph>internal assent
and conviction</emph>, and there is no clinging to dogmas which is
not based on motives of faith, or which could not at any time
be subjected to scientific investigation. If the term <q>blindness
of belief</q> were intended to express only that the believer holds
the revealed doctrine to be true, not because he has discovered its
truth by his own reasoning, but on the authority of God, then
we might suffer the misleading word. But it is utterly false in
the sense that the believer has no conviction at all. Even
though others have it not, the faithful Catholic, the believing
Christian, has it, and it is personal conviction. He has convinced
himself that God has spoken, and of the credibility and
hence the truth of the revealed doctrine, by his own reason, and
this is why he assents.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Still greater is the misrepresentation of the real motive of faith,
if it is held to be the opinion of the Pope or of Roman Prelates. <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>
<pb n='072'/><anchor id='Pg072'/>
thus misstates the Catholic position: <q>Not every one can acquire
knowledge. But any one can believe. The enlightened leaders of the
Church, and the Church herself first of all, have knowledge, and by
dint of authority determine what is to be believed</q> (Ethik, 3d ed., 1903,
I, p. 342). According to the popular scientific propaganda of unbelief,
we have to deal in the Church merely with <q>ignorant monks, Asiatic
patriarchs, and similar dignitaries, some very superstitious, who, for instance,
assembled in the third century and decided <emph>by vote</emph> that the
Gospel is the word of God; we have to deal with men who have
proved their incapacity and incompetence</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Masaryk</hi>, Im Kampfe um
die Religion, 1904, pp. 22-23).
</p>

<p>
Any one who shares such ideas about the supernaturalness of the
Catholic Church has, of course, forfeited his claim to understand Catholic
life and faith. The Catholic believes in his Church, not on any
account of Asiatic patriarchs and superstitious dignitaries, but because
she is led by the Holy Ghost, and the Pope must believe the
same as the humblest of the faithful: neither the Pope himself relies
upon his own judgment, nor does the Catholic who trusts in the word
of the Pope.
</p>

<p>
We add a few remarks which may further illustrate the action of
faith.
</p>

<p>
The knowledge of the fact of revelation, hence of the credibility of
the truths revealed, is certain, as shown above. Nevertheless, <emph>it does
not compel</emph> reason to assent. Under ordinary circumstances it would
be impossible to think of one's own existence, of the elementary laws of
mathematics, without being constrained by the evidence to give direct
internal assent. But insight into the truth of a thing is not always of
this high degree of clearness. In such cases it is an empirical law of
the mind that reason discerns of itself the <emph>logical</emph> necessity, that is, if
it desires to proceed according to the merits of the case, without, however,
acting under <emph>physical</emph> constraint. There remains then the determination,
the command of the will. This is generally true of many judgments
about natural things, but especially true of belief. The knowledge
of the fact of revelation is true and certain, though it might be still
clearer. The truths offered by divine revelation are too deep for us to
comprehend them fully; they imply questions and difficulties for us to
ponder. We feel the physical possibility of pondering these difficulties,
although we see at the same time that the difficulty is exploded by
the certainty of the fact of revelation; but we remain <emph>free</emph> in giving our
assent.
</p>

<p>
Herein lies the possibility of <emph>meritorious</emph> faith, the possibility of the
creature rendering to God the free tribute of his free submission. At
the same time it opens the possibility of turning voluntarily to doubts,
and of submitting to them more and more, till the mind becomes clouded
and ensnared by error. Thus, since faith depends on free will, the will
is strictly commanded to impel the intellect to assent and cling to faith
and to put aside doubts. God has revealed the truths of faith that they
may be firmly believed.
</p>

<p>
Hence faith is a product of the will also, and may become part and
parcel of the sentimental life. Firmly believed, revealed truths engender
in man love and gratitude, fear and hope. And being beautiful and comforting,
<pb n='073'/><anchor id='Pg073'/>
they are embraced fervently by the heart, and become objects
of desire, sources of comfort and happiness. Nevertheless they are in
themselves, and remain, rational judgments, based upon insight and
knowledge; just as the fond recollections of home are and remain acts
of cognition, though our affections are twined round those reminiscences
like wreaths of evergreen.
</p>

<p>
What has just been said illustrates also another point,&mdash;the <emph>relation
of faith to grace</emph>. The Vatican Council says: <q>Faith is a supernatural
virtue by which, through the inspiration and co-operation of
the grace of God, we believe to be true what He has revealed.</q> Faith
is called a gift of God, a work of grace. But this must not mislead us
to think that it is a mystical process, taking place in the human mind,
indeed, but not moving along the natural course of human cognition,
but along quite a different course: perhaps an immediate mystical grasp
of the revealed truth, while natural intelligence stands aside, not understanding
it. This would be returning to our starting point,&mdash;making
faith anything but a judgment of the reason. It is a common
doctrine of theology that the process of faith differs nothing in kind
from the natural process of human intellect in its apprehension of the
truth. It is belief on grounds recognized as sufficient motives for
assent.
</p>

<p>
What then does grace do? Two things. First, it elevates the act
of the soul in the process of believing to a higher sphere. Just as
sanctifying grace elevates the soul itself to a supernatural sphere, permitting
it to partake of the nature of God, so does the grace of faith
raise the acts of the soul to the supernatural order. The <emph>kind</emph> of cognition,
however, remains the same: just as a ring does not alter its
form by being golden instead of silver.
</p>

<p>
In the second place, grace is <emph>assistance</emph>: it enlightens the intellect
that it may be able to see more clearly, not giving to motives of faith
an importance which they have not of themselves, but helping the intellect
to see them as they are; removing the troubles and dangers of
doubt which beset the mind, so that it may retain that calmness which
generally accompanies the possession of the truth. The pledge of this
assistance is given the Christian at baptism and with each increase of
sanctifying grace. But the actual effect of grace depends on many conditions.
If one omits prayer and neglects religious duties, deafens one's
ear to the word of God, incurs knowingly unnecessary dangers to faith,
forsakes the path of virtue, then grace may withdraw to a considerable
extent; doubts become stronger, intellectual darkness and confusion
increase, and man goes on apace towards infidelity.
</p>

<p>
This is the Catholic doctrine concerning faith.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Faith and Reason.</head>

<p>
But to return to our question: In what relation do faith and
the duty to believe stand to freedom of research? We said that
freedom of research consists in exemption from all unjust external
restraint, that is, from those external hindrances to the
<pb n='074'/><anchor id='Pg074'/>
action of the human intellect which prevent it from attaining
its natural end. Now what is this natural end? The answer
will make clear what restraint and laws must be respected by
the human mind, and which may be rightly rejected.
</p>

<p>
On the coat-of-arms of Harvard University is written the
beautiful word <q>Truth.</q> Upon the human mind, too, is inscribed
the word <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Veritati</foreign>&mdash;<emph>for the truth</emph>. The human
mind exists for the sake of truth; for the truth it reasons and
searches; it is its natural object, as sound is the object of the
human ear, and light and colour the object of the eye. And
truth attracts the mind strongly. The child wants the truth, and
tries to get it by its many questions; the historian wants the
truth, and tries to get it by his incessant searching and collecting.
<q>I can hardly resist my craving,</q> <hi rend='italic'>William von Humboldt</hi>
confesses, <q>to see and know and examine as much as possible:
after all, man seems to be here only for the purpose of
appropriating to himself, making his own property, the property
of his intellect, all that surrounds him&mdash;and life is short.
When I depart this life I should like to leave behind me as little
as possible unexperienced by me</q> (apud <hi rend='italic'>O. Willmann</hi>, Didaktik
als Bildungslehre, 3d ed., II, 1903, p. 7). The great physicist,
<hi rend='italic'>W. Thomson</hi>, a few years ago closed a life of eighty-three years&mdash;he
died in December, 1907&mdash;devoted to the last to unabated
search for the truth. It is true not all are called to labour in
this field like <hi rend='italic'>W. Thomson</hi>. But every one who has capability
may and should help to promote the noble work. Only they
are excluded who do not want to look for the truth, or who are
even ready, for external considerations, to pass off falsehood for
the truth, unproved for established results. <q>I know of nothing,</q>
says the ancient sage, <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, <q>that is more worthy of the
human mind than truth</q> (Rep. VI, p. 483 c.). And so
the poet <hi rend='italic'>Pindar</hi> sings: <q>Queen Truth, the mother of sublime
Virtue.</q>
</p>

<p>
If this is the aim of the human mind and its science, there is
but one freedom of research, the <emph>freedom for the truth</emph>, the
right not to be hampered in searching for the truth, not to be
forced to hold as true what has not been previously vouched for
to the intellect as true; in a word, the freedom to wear but one
<pb n='075'/><anchor id='Pg075'/>
chain, the golden chain of the truth. Hence, if the scientist
should be compelled by party interest, or public opinion, to pursue
a course in science which he cannot acknowledge as the right
one; if the younger scientist should feel constrained to conform
the results of his research to the pleasure of his older colleagues
or of men of name, against his own better judgment, then he
would be deprived of his rightful freedom of searching for the
truth, and of deciding for himself when he has found it. But
there is one sort of freedom the scientist should never claim&mdash;<emph>freedom
against the truth</emph>, freedom to ignore the truth, to
emancipate himself from the truth. He is bound to accept every
truth, sufficiently proved, even religious dogmas, miracles too,
provided they are authenticated. Not freedom, but truth, is
the purpose of research: emancipation from the truth is degeneration
of the intellect, destruction of science.
</p>

<p>
What, then, does the duty to believe require of the faithful
Christian? He is required, first of all, to assure himself of the
certain credibility of those truths which he is required to believe,
and here authentic proofs are offered him. On his perception of
the credibility of these truths, he ought to assent to and accept
God's testimony. Hence there should be no coercion to believe
without interior conviction, no obstacle put in the way of recognizing
the truth. <emph>Where, then, is here any opposition to
the lawful freedom of research</emph>, to the right of unimpeded
search for the truth? How is reason hindered in its search for
the truth when truth is offered it by an infallible authority?
We have here no opposition to the laws of reason, but due honour
to its sacred rights; no bondage, but elevation and enrichment,
completion and crowning of its thought, for the highest truth
has been communicated to the reason that it may be of one
mind with that Infinite Wisdom which has shaped reason for
the truth, and from which it obtains its light as the planet from
the sun around which it revolves.
</p>

<p>
Therefore, it cannot be said that <q>the Catholic resolves to
believe as true what the Church teaches in the Apostles' Creed,
but were he offered anything else as Church doctrine he would
accept it as well. Hence these doctrines do not express his own
personal opinions, they are something extraneous to him.</q>
<pb n='076'/><anchor id='Pg076'/>
(<hi rend='italic'>W. Herrmann</hi>, Roemische u. evangelische Sittlichkeit, 3d ed.,
1903, p. 3). No, what the Catholic, what any true Christian,
believes by faith, that is his innermost conviction, as it
is the firm conviction of the historian that what he has drawn
from reliable sources is true.&mdash;But what if the contrary were
offered him? Well, this assumption is absurd; and why? Because
God and His Church are infallible, and an infallible
authority cannot speak the truth and its contrary at the same
time. Much less than a reliable historical witness can testify
to the truth and its contrary at the same time.
</p>

<p>
This same conviction gives to the faithful Christian the firm
assurance that no certain result of human research will ever
come in conflict with his faith, just as the mathematician does
not fear that his principle will ever be contradicted by any
further work. Truth can never contradict truth. <q>Thus we
believe and thus we teach and herein lies our salvation.</q> It
is the very old conviction of the faithful Christian <q>that philosophy,
that is, the study of wisdom, and religion are not different
things.</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non aliam esse philosophiam, i.e., sapientiae
studium et aliam religionem</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>Augustinus</hi>, De Vera Religione,
5). It is precisely this that enables the believing scientist
to devote himself with great freedom and impartiality to
research in every field, and to acknowledge any certified result
without fear of ever having to stop before a definite conclusion.
</p>

<p>
Such is the <emph>peace between faith and science</emph> according
to Christian principles. They are not torn apart, but join hands
peacefully, like truth with truth, like two certain convictions,
only gained in different ways. Similar is the peace and harmony
between the results of various sciences, as physics and
astronomy, geology and biology, which results, though arrived
at by different methods, are still not opposed to each other,
because they are both true.
</p>

<p>
The authority of faith, however, must be <emph>infallible</emph>; the
authority of a scientist, a school or the state, can never approach
us with an absolute obligation to believe it, because it cannot
vouch for the truth. To the Catholic his Church proves itself
infallible; hence everything is here logically consequent. Protestant
Church authorities have not infallibility, nor do they
<pb n='077'/><anchor id='Pg077'/>
claim it. Hence their precepts are seen more and more opposed.
Hence to the Protestant the firm attachment of the
Catholic to his Church must ever remain unintelligible, and
it is regrettable that Catholics take instruction from Protestants
about their relation to their Church.<note place='foot'><p>The difference between the Protestant and the Catholic manner of
reasoning is stated by the convert, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>A. von Ruville</hi>, as follows:
</p>
<p>
<q>My mind had harboured up to now the characteristically Protestant
thought that I, from my superior mental standpoint, was going to probe
the Catholic Church, that I was going to pass an infallible judgment
on her truth or untruth, and this in spite of my being ready to acknowledge
the truth in her. But now I became more and more conscious of
the fact that it was the Church who had a right to pass judgment on me,
that I had to bow to her opinion, that she immeasurably surpassed
me in wisdom. Many details, which I was inclined to criticize, demonstrated
this to me, for in every instance I recognized that it was my
understanding that was at fault, and that what appeared to me as an
imperfection was rooted in the deepest truth. In this way I was gradually
brought to the real Catholic standpoint, to accept the doctrines
immediately as Truth, because they proceeded from the Church, and
then to endeavour to understand them thoroughly, and to reap from
them the fullest possible harvest of Truth. Formerly, with regard to
Protestant doctrines, I always retained my independence and the sovereignty
of my judgment. Why should I not have had my own opinion,
when every denomination and every theologian had an individual
opinion? How different with the Catholic Church. Before her sublime,
never varying wisdom, as it is proclaimed by every simple priest, I
bowed my knees in humility. Compared to her experience of two thousand
years my ephemeral knowledge was a mere nothing</q> (Back to
Holy Church, by Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Albert von Ruville</hi>, pp. 30, 31).</p></note>
</p>

<p>
We must go a step further. If there is a divine revelation
or an infallible Church&mdash;we speak only hypothetically&mdash;then
no man and <emph>no scientific research can claim the right</emph>
to contradict this revelation and Church. Scientific research
is not the hypostatized activity of a superhuman genius, of a god-like
intelligence. No, it is the activity of a human intellect, and
the latter is subject to God and truth everywhere. There can be
no freedom to oppose the truth; no privilege not to be bound to
the truth but rather to have the right to construct one's views
autonomously.
</p>

<p>
But here lies the deeper reason why to-day thousands to whom
<hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> <emph>autonomism in thought</emph> has become the nerve of their
intellectual life, will have nothing to do with guidance by
<pb n='078'/><anchor id='Pg078'/>
revelation and Church. They can no longer understand that
their reason should accept the truth from an external authority,
not, indeed, because they would not find the truth, but because
they would lose their independence.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It was <hi rend='italic'>Sabatier</hi> who maintained that <q>an external authority, no matter
how great one may think it to be, does not suffice to arouse in us
any sense of obligation.</q> And <hi rend='italic'>Th. Lipps</hi> says on this further: <q>If
obedience is taken in its narrower sense, that is, of determination by the
will of another, then no obedience is moral.</q> <q>In brief, obedience is
immoral&mdash;not as a fact but as a feeling, betokening an unfree, slavish
mind</q> (Die ethiseben Grundfragen, 2d ed., 1905, p. 119). And <hi rend='italic'>W.
Herrmann</hi> assures us. <q>We would deem it a sin if we dared treat a
proposition as true of which the ideas are not our own. If we should
find such a proposition in the Bible, then we may perhaps resolve to
wait and see whether its truth cannot be brought home to us after we
have obtained a clearer and stronger insight of ourselves. But from
the resolution to take that proposition as true without more ado, we
could not promise ourselves anything beneficial.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is for the sovereign subject himself to decide whether the
ideas offered are compatible with the rest of his notions. A
truth offered from without is acceptable to the subject only
when, and because, he can produce of himself at the same time
what is offered; but he cannot accept the obligation of <emph>submitting</emph>
to that truth in obedience to faith. <q>There is no infallible
teaching authority on earth, nor can there be any. Philosophy
and science would have to contradict themselves to acknowledge
it,</q> says another champion of <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> freedom (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, Philosophia
militans, 2d ed., p. 52). Hence the reason why there
cannot be any infallible authority is, not because it does not
offer the truth, but because the human intellect must not be
chained down.
</p>

<p>
Now, this is no longer true freedom, but rebellion against
the sacred right that truth has over the intellect. It is rebellion
against the supreme authority of God, who can oblige man to
embrace His revelation with that reason which He Himself has
bestowed upon man. It is a misconception of the human mind,
for it is by no means the source of truth and absolute knowledge,
but weak and in need of supplement. Many truths it cannot by
itself find at all, while in the quest for others it needs safe
guidance lest it lose its way. If it refuses to be supplemented
<pb n='079'/><anchor id='Pg079'/>
and guided from above, it demands the freedom of the weak
vine allowed to break loose from the needed support of the tree,
the freedom of the planet allowed to deviate from its orbit
to be hopelessly wrecked in the universe. The barrenness and
disintegration in the ideal life of our own unchristian age,
are clear testimony that freedom is not only lawlessness but
a sin against one's own nature.
</p>

<p>
Or, do they seek to save themselves by asserting that a divine
revelation and the founding of an infallible Church are <emph>impossible</emph>?
Very well, then, let them prove it. On this the
question hinges. If they can prove it to us, that very moment
we shall cease to be faithful Catholics, and Christianity will have
been the most stupendous lie in history. But if the reverse is
the case, then all declamations in the name of free research fall
to the ground.
</p>

<p>
This impossibility, however, could only be proved by the aid
of a presumption. This presumption is <emph>atheism</emph>, which denies
the existence of a personal God, or at least doubts it. If it
is admitted that there is a personal God, then it is self-evident
that He can give a revelation, and found an infallible Church,
and can oblige all to believe. But herewith collapses also the
liberal principle that, in reasoning, one may reject an external
authority. Hence the principle of liberal freedom in science
can only then be taken seriously, when one advances to atheism.
Then, of course, they will say with <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>: God is dead;
long live the transcendental man!
</p>

<p>
Our assertions are proved by experience. At the end of the
eighteenth century the enlightenment began by excluding all revelation;
but it was desired to retain the rational truth of God's
existence. Since then, liberal science has been aiming at atheism
in philosophy, whether open or masked. And if we follow up
the career of men who have left their faith, we shall soon find
that if they do not seek peace in the sheltering harbour of
thoughtlessness, they have reached the terminal station of atheism.
There is no stopping on this incline.
</p>

<p>
Since it is the express fundamental principle of the liberal
freedom of research, that science is not bound to any external
authority, it is evident that it is nothing else but the refusal
<pb n='080'/><anchor id='Pg080'/>
to submit to God's authority, hence, also, to submit to truth
if it appears as revelation. For, either it is admitted that
if there is a divine revelation, we have to give it our assent&mdash;and
in this event liberal freedom of science would have to be
abandoned,&mdash;or this liberal freedom is adopted in real earnest&mdash;then
it must be admitted that it is tantamount to <emph>radical
apostasy and defection from the truth</emph>. If a man wishes
to be a faithful Christian and at the same time to uphold the
liberal freedom of science, then he has never made clear to
himself what he wishes.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ecce ancilla Domini.</foreign> Thus spoke the Mother of the Lord,
when she heard the message that she was to receive the
Word of the eternal Father in her bosom. This word of
humility and submission was the condition under which she
could receive in herself the eternal Wisdom of the Father.
</p>

<p>
Behold, the Handmaid of the Lord! This word of humility
and submission to God must also be spoken by the creature's
intelligence, if it desires by faith to share in God's truth. Without
humility of mind a faithful attachment to God is impossible;
pride and arrogance lead to desertion of God, faith, and truth.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Multum errant, quoniam superbi sunt</foreign>, says <hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi> of
the erring companions of his youth. Only if there is humility
does God's wisdom cross the threshold of the creature's mind,
only if there is humility can it be said of man: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et verbum
caro factum est et habitat in nobis, plenum gratiae et veritatis</foreign>.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='081'/><anchor id='Pg081'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Authority Of Faith And The Free
Exercise Of Research.</head>

<div>
<head>Preliminary Remarks.</head>

<p>
We must not stop at what we have just said in general
about the relation between the freedom of research and
the obligation to believe. We must go further into detail, in
order to give a more exact explanation of how and where the
authority of faith clashes with research and restrains it. Is it
true that the believing scientist cannot move freely in his research,
that there are barriers on all sides which he may not
overstep? Is it true that the Church may prescribe for the Catholic
scientist what he is allowed to defend and approve, what
he ought to refute and reprove, suppress or advocate, so that
his eyes must ever be turned towards Rome, to inquire and
ascertain what might there be approved? And what a chain of
proscriptions of free thinking is attached to the name of Rome!
Index, Syllabus, <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>&mdash;link after link is added to this chain
of miserable slavery!
</p>

<p>
We shall say something more about this chain later on. First
we must consider the principal question: Where and how do
faith and science come in contact? And what we are going to
say we shall condense into four points. Thus freedom of science
will be more precisely defined; it will be shown what freedom
revelation, and especially the guardian of revelation, the
Church, offers to science: there can be no doubt that its natural
freedom of exercise must be left to science intact.
</p>

<p>
We shall deal in the first place with the <emph>profane sciences</emph>,
and, at least for the present, leave aside the discussion of
theology, since it is clear that theology, being the science of
faith, must assume a peculiar position in regard to the authority
<pb n='082'/><anchor id='Pg082'/>
of faith: theology, moreover, is a special mark for attack;
accordingly we shall deal with it particularly later on. However,
the principles to be cited, being of a general nature, refer
also to the science of faith, and for this reason we shall have
occasion to refer to them.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>1. Authority of Faith and Private Authority.</head>

<p>
We often meet with the most inconceivable notions. We are
told quite seriously that the Church teaches, and that the Catholic
has therefore to believe, that the earth is a flat disc surrounded
by the sea, as the ancients believed; above it is a vault, below it
hell-fire; that the earth stands still and the sun and stars revolve
about it, just as <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi> of Egypt taught; that God created the
whole world just as it is now in exactly six days of twenty-four
hours each; that He made the sun and moon, just as they are
now illuminating the skies; that the strata, just as they now look
when bared by the geologist's hammer, even the coal-fields and
petrified saurians and fossils&mdash;all were made, just as they now
are, well nigh six thousand years ago. The Scriptures teach this,
the Fathers of old and the theologians believe this: and that
is where the Catholic must get his science. And then they are
astonished, and consider dogma retreating before science, when
they see other notions prevailing, when they see Catholic scientists
defend without prejudice the evolution of the solar system,
and even the system of the whole universe, from some primitive
matter, or assume an organic evolution, as far as science supports
it (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Braun</hi>, Ueber Kosmologie u. Standpunkt christlich.
Wiss., 2d ed., 1906, etc.). They would be still more astonished
perhaps to learn that similar ideas had long ago been proposed
by <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi> (cf. Summa c. G. l. 3, c. 77;
<hi rend='italic'>Knabenbauer</hi>, in Stimmen a. M. Laach xiii, 75 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
A distinction must be made between the teaching of the
Church and the private views of individuals, schools, or periods.
Only the teaching of the Church is the obligatory standard of
Christian and Catholic thought, not the opinion of individuals.
Hence not everything that Catholic savants have held to be
true belongs to the teaching of the Church. Only when theologians
unanimously declare something to be contained in the
<pb n='083'/><anchor id='Pg083'/>
deposit of revealed truth, or the teaching of the Church,&mdash;only
then is their teaching authoritative; not because it is the
teaching of theologians, but because it is contained in revelation
or the teaching of the Church. Else the maxim holds
good: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tantum valet auctoritas, quantum argumenta</foreign>. Nor
is all that which a former age found in Holy Scripture, therefore
to be believed as revealed truth, to the exclusion of all
other interpretations.
</p>

<p>
The foregoing may be elucidated by the examples given above.
When Holy Writ describes in figurative language and Oriental,
demonstrative style, how God created the heaven and earth, the
sun and moon, the sea and its contents, it means to teach us
religious truths: that God is the First Cause of everything, and
hence that the sun and moon, for instance, are not uncreated
deities, as the Egyptian believed them to be. The narrative need
not be taken in a literal sense, as if God immediately formed
everything in the exact condition as it now appears to us; it
may be interpreted in the sense that God let the present condition
of things gradually grow out of the forces and materials
and plan of nature He created, the result of a lengthy evolution.
When our Lord tells us in the gospel that His Father in heaven
feeds the birds of the air and clothes the grass of the field, we
know that this is to be understood as a mediate action of God,
which He exercises through the instinct of animals and through
natural forces which He created for the purpose. Now when former
ages, reading the narrative of Genesis, generally understood
an immediate creation of the world, because the knowledge of nature
at the time did not admit of any other interpretation, it is by
no means necessary to conclude from it that every other interpretation
must be rejected as against the Bible, or that the Church
herself has prescribed this literal interpretation as the only
correct one. As is known, <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>, the greatest Father
of the Church, had another very liberal explanation of the Genesis
narrative, and the Church has never censured him. (He
taught that the whole world had been created at one time, and
that the six days of the Mosaic narrative were the logical divisions
of an account of the various orders of creatures.) And
now the interpretations vary greatly. The passages in Scripture,
<pb n='084'/><anchor id='Pg084'/>
in which, according to popular modes of expression, the sun is
said to rise and set and revolve about the earth, the latter
standing in the centre of the world&mdash;these, too, were interpreted
literally in the days of the Fathers: there was no cause
for interpreting them otherwise; but it was only due to defective
knowledge of nature at the time. These temporary errors
remained till corrected by research in the field of the natural
sciences: had the discoveries been made sooner, the errors, too,
would have disappeared sooner.
</p>

<p>
The Church knows, and the holy Fathers knew, that it is not
the purpose of Holy Writ to teach profane sciences, but to instruct
in faith and morals; if it speaks of other matters, it is
but occasionally, and then in the idiom of common life, which
is not the same as the scientific language of the specialist.
Indeed, the Bible does not intend to give scientific instruction in
such matters, nor could it have done so at a time when men were
not ripe for such enlightenment.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> insists that the Spirit of God who spoke through
the authors of Scripture did not intend to instruct men in matters which
do not serve for salvation, and hence he objects to the Scriptures being
taken literally in regard to such matters, because the Bible adapts itself
to man's manner of speech: a distinction is to be made between letter
and sense (<q>Multi multum disputant de iis rebus, quae majore prudentia
nostri auctores omiserunt, ad beatam vitam non profuturas discentibus
... Breviter dicendum est, ... Spiritum Dei, qui per ipsos
loquebatur, noluisse ita docere homines nulli saluti profuturas,</q> De
Gen. ad lit., II, 9, n. 20. Cf. De Gen. contra Manich. 1, 5, n. 3; 11, n. 17).
He further cautions Bible students against putting their own interpretation
upon obscure passages and then claiming it to be dogma, because
one may easily go astray and thus make the Scriptures appear ridiculous.
<q>In rebus obscuris atque a nostris oculis remotissimis, si qua
inde scripta etiam divina legerimus, quae possint salva fide, qua imbuimur,
alias atque alias parere sententias, in nullam earum nos praecipiti
affirmatione proiciamus, ut si forte, diligentius discussa veritas
eam recte labefactaverit, corruamus, non pro sententia divinarum
scripturarum sed pro nosctra ita dimicantes, ut eam velimus scripturarum
esse, quae nostra est</q> (De genesi ad lit. I, 18 n. 37). <q>Plerumque
accidit, ut aliquid de terra, de coelo, de ceteris mundi huius elementis
... etiam non christianus ita noverit, ut certissima ratione et
experientia teneat. Turpe est autem nimis et perniciosum ac maxime
cavendum, ut christianus de his rebus quasi secundum christianas
literas loquentem ita delirare quilibet infidelis audiat, ut, quemadmodum
dicitur, toto coelo errare conspiciens, risum tenere vix possit</q> (Ibid. I,
19 n. 39). Cf. also I, 21. <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas of Aquin</hi> also expresses himself
<pb n='085'/><anchor id='Pg085'/>
in this sense: <q>Multum autem nocet, talia, quae ad pietatis doctrinam
non spectant, vel asserere vel negare, quasi pertinentia ad sacram doctrinam
... Unde mihi videtur tutius esse, ut haec, quae philosophi
communius senserunt et nostrae fidei non repugnant, neque sic esse asserenda
ut dogmata fidei, licet aliquando sub nomine philosophorum introducantur,
neque sic esse neganda tamquam fidei contraria, ne sapientibus
huius mundi contemnendi doctrinam fidei occasio praebeatur</q>
(Opusc. X. ad Jo. Vercel. Proem.).
</p>

<p>
The doctrine of the <emph>Church</emph> concurs with this, as laid down in
numerous documents, many of them quoting the above-mentioned words
of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>. It also insists that the interpretation of the Fathers
be only taken as a standard of the Church's explanation of the meaning
of Scripture when they are unanimous on the meaning of a passage
relating to faith and morals; but not to other things (cf. Encycl.
Providentissimus, Denz. 10 ed., n. 1947, 1944; Conc. Trid., sess. IV.,
Conc. Vat. sess. III., c. 2, Denz. nn. 786, 1788).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Now if one simply opens Holy Scripture, takes up some passage
at random, explains it in its most literal sense, and then
insists that this is the evident meaning, and goes on to assert
with the same insistence that this is the interpretation of the
Church, and a part of the faith of Catholics in regard to the
natural sciences, then of course it is very easy to make out
contradictions between faith and science: but such efforts cannot
claim to be scientific. It is not necessary to know theology
and the principles of Catholic exegesis; but it is not proper
that those who are ignorant of these matters pass judgment on
them, not even in the name of objective research.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hence we may easily see what we should think of a writer who
asserts that the examination of the Christian-Catholic idea of the
world leads to the following results: <q>The Books of Moses, inspired by
divine revelation, are the golden key to the understanding of the whole
history of creation. Other Scriptural passages of the Old and New
Testaments, the writings of the Fathers, etc., are to be considered as
supplementary to these. According to these authorities the earth is
a flat disc, surrounded by the sea. Above it arches the firmament
of heaven, with its great lights for day and night. Below it are
purgatory and hell. All this is not the gradual outgrowth of lengthy
evolution, but was created by God out of nothing in a few days,
about six thousand years ago, of which four thousand are reckoned
before Christ and two thousand after Christ. Although modern science
has long since established that the Biblical narrative is of no worth,
nothing but an imperfect reproduction of older myths, the Catholic
Church continues to teach it literally to this very day, spreading it
broadcast by thousands and thousands of catechisms, and insisting on
it being learned as a part of religious instruction in all schools, and
<pb n='086'/><anchor id='Pg086'/>
to be accepted as the revealed truth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>L. Wahrmund</hi>, Katholische
Weltanschauung und freie Wissenschaft, 1908, p. 14. The scientific
value of this work has been considered by <hi rend='italic'>L. Fonck</hi>, Katholische
Weltansch).
</p>

<p>
<q>Clericalism,</q> we are told, <q>stands on a rigidly fixed view of the
world, corresponding in part to the childhood of mankind, to the dawning
of civilization.... Philosophy, built upon the results of progress,
since it is unceasingly forcing its way ahead, cannot remain in accord
with the notions belonging to a remote past, partly to Babylonian and
Egyptian civilization, partly to the thought of nomadic times.</q> It is
then pointed out how this view of the world on which clericalism, that is,
the Catholic Church, is based, has already been overthrown in many instances.
<q>The geocentric position, the doctrine of our earth being the
centre and man the ultimate aim of the universe, must needs be abandoned
by the world of scientists, in view of the new system of Copernicus;
the doctrine also of the earth being a disc must be abandoned in
consequence of the voyage of Columbus, and subsequent discoveries,
which make it certain that the earth is a globe</q> (Prof. <hi rend='italic'>K. Menger</hi>, Die
Eroberung der Universitaeten. Neue Freie Presse, Nov. 24, 1907). It
is surprising what little knowledge suffices to warrant writing about
theological matters in the name of <q>objective research.</q>
</p>

<p>
These passages, in regard to their scientific contents and manner,
recall vividly an American work that appeared some time ago, and
reached many editions. It is entitled, <q>A History of the Conflict Between
Religion and Science,</q> by <hi rend='italic'>J. W. Draper</hi>. The book was answered by
a competent authority, <hi rend='italic'>De Smedt</hi>, S. J., <q>L'Eglise et la Science,</q> 1877.
</p>

<p>
It seems <hi rend='italic'>Draper's</hi> arguments have since become a pattern for many.
He, too, maintains that Holy Writ has always been declared by the
Church and the Fathers to be a source of profane science. This, he states,
is true especially of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>. We read: <q>The book of Genesis ...
also in a philosophical point of view became the grand authority of
Patristic science. Astronomy, geology, geography, anthropology, chronology,
and indeed all the various departments of human knowledge, were
made to conform to it.... The doctrines of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> have had the
effect of thus placing theology in antagonism with science....</q> <q>No
one did more than this Father to bring science and religion into antagonism;
it was mainly he who diverted the Bible from its true office&mdash;a
guide to purity of life&mdash;and placed it in the perilous position of being
the arbiter of human knowledge....</q> <q>What, then, is that sacred, that
revealed science, declared by the Fathers to be the sum of all knowledge?...
As to the earth, it affirmed that it is a flat surface, over
which the sky is spread like a dome. In this the sun and moon and stars
move, so that they may give light by day and by night to man....
Above the sky or firmament is heaven; in the dark and fiery space beneath
the earth is hell....</q> (pp. 57-63).
</p>

<p>
By reading again what we said above, especially the urgent admonitions
of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> not to look upon the Scriptures as a text-book of
profane science, one will be able to appreciate the scientific quality of
the book in question.
</p>

<p>
The fancy of this writer has distorted Christianity and the Church
into a monster that has nothing more important to do than to tread
<pb n='087'/><anchor id='Pg087'/>
down and crush science and civilization. A few examples will suffice to
show how he proves the <emph>contradictions between faith and science</emph>.
The Christian religion teaches that man is subject to death as
a penalty for original sin: prior to that sin death had no power over
Adam and Eve. It is claimed that this is a contradiction of science.
But how? Long before Adam, thousands of animals and plants had
died, the author asserts. <q>The doctrine declared to be orthodox by
ecclesiastical authority is overthrown by the unquestionable discoveries
of modern science. Long before a human being had appeared on earth
millions of individuals, nay, more, thousands of species and even genera
had died</q> (p. 57). The author has completely missed the point. The
matter in question is not the death of animals and plants, but the death
of man. The infallibility of the Pope is refuted by the fact that he
failed to foresee the result of the war between France and Germany.
<q>Notwithstanding his infallibility, which implies omniscience, His Holiness
did not foresee the issue of the Franco-Prussian war</q> (p. 352, also
p. 362).
</p>

<p>
How high his historical statements are to be rated is shown by the
assertion that <hi rend='italic'>Cyril of Alexandria</hi> had much to do with the introduction
of the worship of the Virgin Mary (p. 55); that auricular confession
was introduced by the Fourth Lateran Council in 1215 (p. 208).
He asks when the idea originated that the Pentateuch was written by
Moses under divine inspiration, and he finds that <q>not until after the
second century [of the Christian era] was there any such extravagant
demand on human credulity</q> (p. 220). It would seem incredible that
any one could write such stuff.
</p>

<p>
The author says in his preface: <q>I had also devoted much attention
to the experimental investigation of natural phenomena, and had published
many well-known memoirs on such subjects. And perhaps no
one can give himself to these pursuits, and spend a large part of his
life in the public teaching of science, without partaking of that love of
impartiality and truth which philosophy incites</q> (VIII-IX). We
do not care to argue with the author about his experience in experimental
research, nor about his love for the truth, but he himself has
shown superabundantly that they have not sufficed to keep him clear
from scientific shallowness and the grossest blunders. Nevertheless, it
seems that his scientific ability obtained for him in the consideration of
many the weight of an authority. <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, in his <q>Weltraetsel,</q> refers
repeatedly to the book, and recommends <q>its truthful statements and
excellent discussion</q> to his readers (Weltraetsel, 17. Kap., Wissenschaft
u. Christentum).
</p>

<p>
Such is the fashion in which contradictions between faith and science,
and the Church's hostility towards scientific research, are proved.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The result is that we must distinguish clearly between
dogmas of faith and private opinions or interpretations. Of
course it may frequently happen, and has happened, that the
Christian savant is too timorous, and looks askance at the discoveries
of science, and even thinks he ought to resist them,
<pb n='088'/><anchor id='Pg088'/>
because he is afraid that religious truth might be opposed by
them. Nor can it be said that this timidity is altogether without
excuse, for there was hardly one scientific discovery of the
nineteenth century that was not immediately grasped and exploited
by eager enemies of the Christian religion. Too often
has science been made the menial of infidelity, and the assertion
has been untiringly repeated that science and faith
cannot agree. No wonder, then, that timid souls become
suspicious, that they are prone to resist the whole theory of
evolution in a lump, instead of trying to distinguish between
what is of scientific value in it, and what is misused for the purpose
of denying creation.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, such narrow-mindedness is strongly to be censured.
It has often caused the reproach, that Catholics lack
the freedom to admit scientific discoveries. They forget the
wise admonition of the prince of mediæval theologians, that it
were advisable, in regard to scientific views which have nothing
to do with religion, neither to set them down as truths of faith,
nor either to reject them as contrary to faith lest occasion
be given to think contemptuously of the faith. As long as
men are and men think, narrow-mindedness will never be lacking.
Hence if the believing scientist wants to know whether he
is running counter to faith in any particular, he has to ascertain
from theological text-books what the Church declares to
belong to faith, what explanation of Holy Scripture is unconditionally
binding, and not what is the individual opinion of
theologians, much less what some pious nurse is telling the
little ones.
</p>

<p>
This is the first rule concerning the relation between faith and
science: it states what the scientist is <emph>not</emph> tied down to.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2. Science Retains its Method of Research.</head>

<p>
But when and how may the scientist be restricted? Here we
come to the second point: the directions which faith may give
to the profane sciences are in themselves not of a positive but
of a <emph>negative kind</emph>; revelation and Church cannot tell the
scientist what he is to assert or defend in the field of the profane
sciences, but only what propositions he must <emph>avoid</emph>. Thus
<pb n='089'/><anchor id='Pg089'/>
every science is left free to pursue its own method of research.
It is not difficult to understand this.
</p>

<p>
Faith draws from divine revelation; profane sciences, as
such, do not draw from divine revelation, but only from experience
and reason. Philosophy would cease to be philosophy
and become theology did it demonstrate the immortality of the
soul by revelation. The anthropologist would cease to be an
anthropologist and become a theologian if he would attempt to
prove the common origin of mankind by Holy Scripture.
</p>

<p>
In other words, the profane sciences are distinguished from
faith and theology by their formal object, by the end they have
in view, by the scientific method with which they handle their
subject. Theology, of course, uses revelation extensively; and
in this it differs from the other sciences. Hence faith cannot
command the anthropologist to defend also in profane science
the common origin of the human race from Adam and Eve,
because it is held to be a revealed truth. He must say: I
believe as a Christian that this is true, established by divine
revelation, and no science will ever prove the contrary; but
whether I can positively defend this fact as resulting from
anthropology, depends on my ability to corroborate it by the
methods of this science, that is by the testimony of profane
history. And just as little could the historian be required to
obtain historical results of which he cannot produce the evidence
according to his method.
</p>

<p>
Therefore faith can only tell the profane scientist that he
must not assert anything which is held by faith to be erroneous;
that it is false to say there is nothing but force and
matter, that the human soul ends in death, or that the various
families of the human race have not a common origin. As soon
as the scientist knows by faith that a thing is false, he is bound
to refrain from asserting it: bound in the first place by the duty
to believe, but also by the principles of his own science, which
is to find not error, but truth, which forbids to assert what
has been proved to be erroneous. Perhaps his own means
will not enable him to prove the truth independently of revelation;
then from the standpoint of his science he must say, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Non
liquet.</foreign>
</p>

<pb n='090'/><anchor id='Pg090'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The position of the Catholic Church agrees with these principles. She
knows, and emphasizes that science has its own method, and hence a
natural right and freedom to proceed in its own field according to its
method. The Church rejects but one kind of freedom, viz., the freedom
to propound a doctrine proved by faith to be erroneous. <q>The Church
by no means forbids these disciplines to use in their own field their own
principles and method,</q> declares the Vatican Council. <q>But, while
acknowledging this lawful freedom, the Church takes care to prevent
them from taking up errors in opposition to divine teaching, or from
creating confusion by transgressing their limits and invading the realm
of faith</q> (Vat. sess. III, ch. 4. Cf. also the letter of <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX</hi>., <q>Gravissimas,</q>
of Dec. 11, 1862, to the Archbishop of Munich, Denz. n. 1666,
<hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>)
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These few remarks show the lack of intelligence in the
charge that <q>Catholic philosophy starts from dogmas and revelation,</q>
or that the Church would dictate to scientists everything
they should teach; that, according to its principles it
could claim the right <q>to impose upon a physicist of <hi rend='italic'>Zeppelin's</hi>
era the task of proving the Ascension of Christ or the Assumption
of Mary by aërostatic rules.</q> This is simply gross ignorance
or misrepresentation.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3. Restraint Only in the Province of Revelation.</head>

<p>
In what matters may faith and the Church be a guide to
research in this negative sense? In all fields, or only some?
Evidently only in their own sphere. But to the sphere of faith
belongs only what is contained in divine revelation, viz., the
truths of <emph>religion and morality</emph>, as laid down in Scripture
and tradition, the truths of God and His work of salvation,
of man and his way to his eternal destiny, of the means of
grace, and of the Church. Whatever lies outside of that sphere
does not belong to the province of faith. This is true also
of the teaching authority of the Church. The purpose of the
Church is to guard faithfully the treasure of divine revelation
and to transmit it in an authoritative manner to mankind: hence
her authority in teaching is confined to what is contained in
revelation, and what is necessary for an efficient custody and
transmission of it to mankind. Hence she may declare certain
truths as revealed, she may reject opposing errors, she may condemn
books offensive to faith, she may approve or reject systems
<pb n='091'/><anchor id='Pg091'/>
of ethics. But she cannot set up wholly new religious truths
or revelations. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Depositum custodi</foreign>&mdash;this is the purpose of
the Church. Still less are matters of an entirely profane nature
subject to the teaching authority of the Church. Profane
sciences can therefore receive direction from faith only in those
matters which at the same time belong to the province of faith.
</p>

<p>
What follows from this? It follows that <emph>almost all the
profane sciences are incapable of being instructed or
restricted by faith</emph>, because their province lies outside
that of faith, and does not come in touch with it: they are left
to themselves to correct their errors. When the astronomer in
his observatory watches the movements of the planets, and bases
thereon his mathematical calculations, when the physicist or
chemist in his laboratory observes the laws of nature or makes
new discoveries, when the pathologist studies the symptoms of
diseases in organisms, no warning voice interrupts their work
of study. Of course when they deny the creation, the possibility
of miracles, then they conflict with faith; but then they
have ceased to be naturalists, they have become philosophers.
When the botanist or zoölogist in his laboratory is studying
plants and animals and collecting his specimens, when the
palæontologist is excavating and examining his fossils, they
enjoy perfect freedom: all this has nothing directly to do
with faith. And there is no warning sign set up for the geographer
or geologist when settling the orographical or hydrographical
conditions of countries or measuring geological strata;
no danger signal disturbs the linguist in establishing the grammar
of unknown languages, nor the archæologist or the historian,
when they discover new documents or decipher inscriptions.
Nor does anybody interrupt the mathematician in his
calculations.
</p>

<p>
What unnecessary worry, then, for the representatives of
mathematics, geology, palæontology, and chemistry to write
burning protests against the fetters of dogma in the interest of
their scientific activity! And it is superfluous worry for professors
of the technical arts to get excited by imagining that
electricity and steam must be treated according to ecclesiastical
precepts. Nor is there need of emphasizing the statement that
<pb n='092'/><anchor id='Pg092'/>
there cannot be a Catholic chemistry, geography, or mathematics&mdash;it
is self-evident.
</p>

<p>
Hence almost the entire province of the profane sciences,
which are the pride of our age and occupy the foremost
position in our universities, with their laboratories, institutes
and observatories and meteorological stations, are free and perfectly
undisturbed by faith. If accordingly any one should be
of the opinion that the Christian-minded scientist were hindered
in his scientific research, he would have to consider him an unhampered
investigator at least in this vast field.
</p>

<p>
Most in touch with faith comes <emph>philosophy</emph>. Not in the
vast field of logic, of empirical psychology, in questions concerning
the essence of bodies and their forces, in matters of
mere history of philosophy; but in questions of views of the
world and life, in metaphysics and ethics, it does. These,
the highest questions, bearing on the direction and pursuit of
human life, matters that most occupy the human mind, are at
the same time subjects of revelation; God Himself has deigned
to teach the truth in these matters, to make them safe for all
time against the error of the mind of man. Here philosophers
encounter danger-signals. They hear, what their reason even
tells them, that it is erroneous to think there is no world of spirits,
no God above nature, no immortality, no life hereafter, no
providence. Nor could one say that philosophy is the loser by
being kept from error which endangers human life. Nowhere
are errors so apt to occur as in questions which are outside the
sphere of immediate experience; nowhere are self-deceptions
more common than there, where disposition and character continually
influence the mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A modern representative of philosophy, <hi rend='italic'>E. Adickes</hi>, writes as follows:
<q>In the course of this history (of metaphysics) there have been given
long since all the principal answers that are at all possible to all metaphysical
questions. The building up of metaphysical systems can and
will proceed, nevertheless, and their multiplicity will remain.... Of
course, progress will not be gained thereby: results will not gain in
certainty, contradictions and mysteries do not diminish.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>If the greatest of the ancient Greek natural scientists, physicians,
and geographers should rise again they would be amazed at the progress
made in their sciences; like beginners they would sit at the feet of
teachers of our day, they would lack the most elementary ideas; they
<pb n='093'/><anchor id='Pg093'/>
would first have to learn what every grammar-school boy knows, and
much of what they once considered achievements would be disclosed to
them as deception or mere hypothesis. On the other hand a <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, an
<hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, a <hi rend='italic'>Zeno</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Epicurus</hi>, might readily take part in our discussions
about God and the soul, about virtue and immortality. And they
could safely use their old weapons, the keenness of which has suffered
but little from the rust of time and the attacks of opponents. They
would be astonished at the little progress made, so that now, after two
thousand years, the same answers are given to the same questions.</q>
(Charakter und Weltanschauung, 1905, p. 24).
</p>

<p>
A science which must make such a confession has no reason to reject
with haughty self-confidence the intimations of a divine revelation.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The <emph>science of history</emph> again has not the duty of praising
everything that has happened within the Catholic Church
or else to repress it; no, only the truth is desired. But it must
not start out with the assumption that God's influence in the
world, a divine revelation, miracles, and a supernatural guidance
of the Church, are impossible; nor must it attempt to construe
history according to that assumption. Hence it must not
undertake to explain the religion of the Jewish nation, or the
origin of Christianity, by unconditionally ignoring everything
supernatural, and attempting to eliminate it by prejudiced research
and by means of natural factors, whether they be called
Babylonic myths or Greek philosophy or anything else; it must
not impugn the credibility of the Gospel, claiming that reports
of miracles must be false; it must not write the history of the
Church and deliberately ignore its supernatural character, as
if it were the violent struggle of a federation of priests for universal
rule. Assured results undoubtedly are arrived at in history
less frequently than in other sciences; it offers full
play to suppositions, hypotheses, constructive fancy, the influence
of ideas inculcated by education and personal views of
the world, especially when summing up facts. Hence here
more than anywhere else must moral character and unselfish
love of the truth stand higher than the desire for freedom.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>history of religion</emph> and <emph>anthropology</emph> must be forbidden
to assume that the human mind is but a product of
animal evolution, that therefore religion and morality, family
and state life, reason and language, and the entire intellectual
and social life have necessarily evolved from the first stages
<pb n='094'/><anchor id='Pg094'/>
of animal life. If we add that <emph>jurisprudence</emph> in its highest
principles comes in touch with faith, and that it also must
not dispute the divine right of the Church, we have mentioned
the most important sciences and instances in which the investigator
must take faith into consideration.
</p>

<p>
We now understand in what sense we may rightly speak
of a <q><emph>Christian philosophy and science</emph></q> or of a <q><emph>Catholic
science of history</emph>.</q> Surely not in this sense that philosophy
and history have to draw their results from Holy Scripture
or from the dogmatical decisions of the Church; nor
in the sense that they have to make positive defence for everything
that the Church finds it necessary to prescribe. The sense
is merely this: they guide themselves by faith, as we said
above, by refraining from propositions and presumptions proved
by faith to be false. In a large measure this is also the meaning
of the often-misrepresented term, <emph>Catholic University</emph>. In
the reverse sense we may speak of a liberal science. It is that
science which in the field of philosophy and religion guides itself
by the principles of liberalism and the principle of liberal freedom
and the rejection of faith. But to speak of a Catholic,
Protestant, Liberal chemistry or mathematics, has no sense at
all, because these disciplines, like most other profane sciences,
have no direct connection with Catholicism, Protestantism, or
Liberalism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That we have stated correctly the <emph>attitude of the Catholic Church</emph>
is evidenced by more than one official document. In the decree of the
Holy Office of July 3, 1907, the so-called Syllabus of <hi rend='italic'>Pius X.</hi>, the following
(5.) proposition is condemned: <q>Inasmuch as the treasure of
faith contains only revealed truths, it does not behoove the Church under
any consideration to pass judgment on the assertions made by human
sciences.</q> Similarly was the proposition (14), likewise condemned
in the Syllabus of <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi>: <q>Philosophy must be pursued without
any regard to supernatural revelation.</q>
</p>

<p>
These condemnations stirred up anger: <q>Now,</q> it was said, <q>the
Church wants to subject the whole of human knowledge to her judgment:
this is unbearable insolence.</q> But what follows from these condemnations?
The opposite truth asserted in them is this: the Church in
one respect must pass judgment on the assertions made by human
science, namely, in so far as they come in conflict with the doctrines of
faith. The only freedom rejected by the Council is the freedom to contradict
revealed truth: it must not be held <q>that human science may
be pursued with freedom, that its assertions can be considered true and
<pb n='095'/><anchor id='Pg095'/>
must not be rejected by the Church even if they contradict a revealed
doctrine.</q> (sess. III, ch. 4, can. 2). The Church does not want to
judge on matters of profane science; but she claims the right, due to
her as guardian appointed for the preservation of the pure faith, to
raise her warning voice when, for instance, natural science transgresses
its limits and trespasses on the province of religion by denying the
creation of the world. It is but self-defence against an attack upon
her inviolable domain. But she does not claim the authority to sit in
judgment upon the results of astro-physics, upon the atom-hypothesis,
or its opposite; or on the acceptance of a theory about ions or
earthquakes.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Another question may be touched upon: Is the <emph>Catholic
historian</emph> free to proceed steadily in the search after historic
truth, even where he discovers facts which do not reflect honour
on his Church? And where it is a question of uncertain, private
revelation, of doubtfulness of relics and other sacred objects
exposed for public worship, may he proceed undisturbed with his
critical research, or is he restrained by ecclesiastical authority?
</p>

<p>
Should the Catholic meet with dark passages in the history of
his Church, then every well-meaning observer will demand that
he display in the treatment of such matters a pious forbearance
for his Church. His respect for her will dictate this.
Unsparing criticism and hunting for blemishes and shadows
must be excluded. But he cannot on this account be bound to
pass by the unpleasant facts he may meet in his researches, or
to cloak or deny them against his better knowledge. He knows
that the divinity of his Church shows itself to best advantage
just because, notwithstanding many weaknesses and faults,
past and present, she passes unvanquished and imperishable
through all storms,&mdash;a token of the supernatural origin of her
strength and power of endurance.
</p>

<p>
It was this very thought that moved <hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi> to open the
Vatican Archives for freest research to friend and enemy,&mdash;the
clearest proof that could possibly be given that the Church does
not fear historical truth. In his letter of admonition, of August
18, 1883, urging the fostering of historiography, the same Pope
gives the following rules for the Catholic scientist: <q>The first
law of history is that it must not say anything false; the second,
that it must not be afraid of saying the truth, lest a suspicion
of partiality and unfairness arise.</q> An excellent example of
<pb n='096'/><anchor id='Pg096'/>
the application of these rules is found in <hi rend='italic'>L. v. Pastor's</hi> <q>History
of the Popes,</q> especially in what he says about <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
VI.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Leo X.</hi>
</p>

<p>
In his historical investigation of private revelations, such as
those of <hi rend='italic'>St. Gertrude</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>St. Mechtild</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bl. Juliana of Liège</hi>, or of
relics and objects of veneration, the historian is likewise not
restricted by Church-direction. Having merely the task of preserving
the treasure of the faith received from Christ and the
Apostles, the Church in her function as Teacher never vouches
for the divine origin of new, private revelations, nor for the accuracy
of pious traditions of another kind. True, she decides
authoritatively whether private revelations contain anything
against faith and morals, but she decides nothing more.
If she accepts such revelations or traditions as genuine, she
claims for the facts in question only that human faith which
corresponds to their historical proof.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This is clearly stated by the recent encyclical <hi rend='italic'>Pascendi</hi>: <q>In judging
of pious traditions, the following must be kept in mind: the
Church employs such prudence in treating of these matters that she
does not allow such traditions to be written about except with great
precaution and only after making the declarations required by <hi rend='italic'>Urban
VIII.</hi>; and even then, after this has been properly done, the Church
by no means asserts the truth of the private revelation or of the
tradition, but merely permits them to be believed, provided there be
sufficient human reasons. It was in this sense that the Sacred Congregation
of Rites declared thirty-one years ago: <q>These apparitions
are neither approved nor condemned by the Holy See; it merely permits
them to be believed in a natural way, provided the tradition on which
they rest be corroborated by credible testimonies and documents.</q>
Whoever follows this maxim is safe. The veneration of such things
is always conditional, it is only relative, and on the condition that
the tradition be true. In so far only is the veneration absolute as it
relates to the Saint to whom the veneration is paid. The same
applies to the veneration of relics.</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Benedict XIV.</hi> says of private
revelations: <q>Praedictis revelationibus etsi <hi rend='italic'>approbatis</hi>, non debere
nec posse a nobis adhiberi assensum fidei catholicae, sed tantum
fidei humanae juxta regulas prudentiae, juxta quas praedictae revelationes
sunt probabiles et pie credibiles.</q> De Serv. Dei beatificatione, III,
c. ult. n. 15).
</p>

<p>
Hence the historian is free to investigate such traditions critically,
provided, of course, that he does not violate the reverence due to sacred
things.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='097'/><anchor id='Pg097'/>

<div>
<head>4. Infallible and Non-Infallible Teachings.</head>

<p>
Now to consider a last point. Does it not rest entirely with
the pleasure of ecclesiastical authority, as would seem from what
has been said above, to suppress at any time the results, or at
least the hypotheses, of scientific research by pointing to putative
truths of faith presumed to be in opposition? Then, of
course, the scientist would be at the mercy of a zealous ecclesiastical
authority. Or will it perhaps be said that this authority
is infallible in its every decision? Think of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, of the
interdict against the Copernican view of the world, and you will
be able fully to appreciate the danger alluded to!
</p>

<p>
We shall later on return to the famous case of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>. For
the present we only call attention to a distinction which must
not be overlooked, the distinction between infallible teachings
and those that are not infallible.<note place='foot'>Infallible teachings are often also called dogmas. But they are not
always dogmas in the strict sense. In the strict sense dogmas are such
truths as are contained in divine revelation, and are proclaimed by the
infallible teaching authority of the Church to be believed as such by
the faithful. In a broader sense those tenets are often called dogmas
which are presented by revelation or by the Church as infallible truths.
In this sense all teachings of faith clearly found in Holy Scripture are
dogmas, even if not declared by the Church. In this sense Protestants,
too, believe in revealed dogmas.</note>
</p>

<p>
According to Catholic teaching, the universal teaching body of
the Church, when declaring unanimously to be an object of
faith something relating to faith and morals, is endowed with
<emph>infallibility</emph>, and also when in its daily practice of the faith
it unanimously professes a doctrine to be a truth of faith. This
infallibility is also possessed by the Pope alone when, acting in
his capacity as Supreme Teacher of the Church in matters of
faith and morals, he intends to give a permanent decision for the
whole Church (ex cathedra).
</p>

<p>
Besides these infallible teachings there are also <emph>non-infallible</emph>
teachings, and they are the more frequent. Such are, first
of all, the ordinary doctrinal utterances of the Pope himself in
his regular supervision of the teaching of doctrine: these instructions
and declarations are of a lower kind than those peremptory
<pb n='098'/><anchor id='Pg098'/>
ones that are pronounced ex cathedra: he is infallible
only in the utterance of these ultimate, supreme decisions, the
chief bulwark, as it were, erected against the floods of error.
Decisions ex cathedra are very rare. Encyclical letters, too, are,
as a rule, not infallible. It is self-evident that the theological
opinions and statements of the Pope as a private person, not as
Supreme Head of the Church, do not belong here at all. They
have no official character and are in no way binding.
</p>

<p>
Among decisions that are not infallible are further included,
in various degrees, the doctrinal utterances of Bishops, of particular
synods, and especially those of the Roman Congregations.
The latter are bodies of Cardinals, delegated by the
Head of the Church, as highest Papal boards, to co-operate
with him in the various offices of administration. Of
these, the Congregation of the Holy Office and that of the
Index may also render decisions on doctrinal questions.
Although the Congregations act by virtue of their delegation
from the Pope, and publish their decrees with his consent, the
decisions are not decisions of the Pope himself, but remain decisions
of the Cardinals. Much less can the infallibility of the
Pope pass over to them: it is his personal prerogative, the aid of
the Holy Ghost is promised to him, and protects his judgments
under certain conditions against error.
</p>

<p>
But the Catholic owes submission also to the non-infallible
teachings; and not only an outer submission, a reverent silence,
that offends not either verbally or in writing against the decision
rendered, but he owes also his inner assent. But it cannot be
that unconditional inner assent which he owes to the infallible
decision, for this he holds to be irrevocably certain; nor is
his assent to non-infallible decisions a real act of faith. He
is not given any unconditional guarantee of the truth. An error
is, of course, most unlikely, but not absolutely impossible.
Hence the faithful Catholic should always be ready to accept
such decisions in as far as they are warranted by recognized
truth. This applies to all kinds of doctrinal teaching, but of
course in different ways, corresponding to the degree of authority,&mdash;for
instance, Papal decisions are of higher authority
than those of the Congregations,&mdash;yet it applies also to the
<pb n='099'/><anchor id='Pg099'/>
doctrinal decisions of the Congregations, because they are the
ordinary teaching organs of the Church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
When the Congregation of the Index, 1857, had forbidden the works
of <hi rend='italic'>Guenther</hi> and many thought they could evade the decision, <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi>
wrote, June 15, to the Archbishop of Cologne: <q>The decree is so far-reaching
that nobody may think himself free not to hold what we have
confirmed.</q> Similar was what the Pope had written to the Archbishop of
Mecheln after the condemnation of the ontological errors of <hi rend='italic'>Ubagh</hi>. The
Motu proprio of <hi rend='italic'>Pius X.</hi> of November 8, 1907, speaks similarly of the
obligation of submission to the decisions of the Papal Biblical Commission
relating to doctrines, and to the decrees of Congregations when
approved by the Pope. (Cf. also the Syllabus of Pius IX., sent. 22.)
</p>

<p>
Theologians agree that this requisite internal assent is not the
same as irrevocable assent. This was also declared by <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> in his
letter to the Archbishop of Munich-Freising, saying that this inner
submission is by no means faith; and no theologian will ascribe infallibility
to a mere congregational decree. (See on this point: <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>
<hi rend='italic'>Grisar</hi>, Galileistudien, 1882, 171 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi> Cr. <hi rend='italic'>Pesch</hi>, Theol. Zeitfragen,
Erste Folge, 1900, III. <hi rend='italic'>Egger</hi>, Streiflichter ueber die freiere Bibelforschung,
1889.)
</p>

<p>
It would be erroneous to think that only in recent times, after the
embarrassment caused by the regrettable <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> decision the subtle
distinction had been invented that congregational decisions are not binding
on Catholics with absolute force. This was taught by theologians
long before the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> case caused any excitement. In this sense the
celebrated writer on Moral Theology, <hi rend='italic'>Lacroix</hi>, said: <q>The declarations
of none of these Congregations are infallible.... No infallibility is
promised to the Congregation in so far as it is viewed as separate
from the Pope</q> (Theologia Moralis, 1729, I, n. 215). <hi rend='italic'>Raccioli</hi>, soon
after the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> trial, wrote: <q>The Holy Congregation of Cardinals as
separate from the Pope cannot give to any proposition the proper authority
of faith.</q> And he adds: <q>There being extant no decision of the
Pope, or of a Council directed and confirmed by him, the proposition of
the sun moving and the earth standing still cannot on the strength
of a congregational decree be considered a truth that must be believed</q>
(Almagestum novum, 1651, I, 52).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The obligation to give interior assent also to an authority not
infallible, cannot seem strange if this authority offers a
guarantee for the truth commensurate to the assent demanded.
We certainly ask of a child to receive the instruction from his
parent and teacher with internal assent, so far as the latter
does not run counter to its instinct for the truth, else the education
of the child and the needful influence over its intellectual
life would be impossible. Upon the Church has been bestowed
by her divine Founder the task of guiding the faithful
<pb n='100'/><anchor id='Pg100'/>
authoritatively in the educational matters committed to the
Church, and not only in their youth but throughout their
lives. This guidance in religion and morality would be impossible
if the faithful could constantly deny their internal assent
to the instruction of the Church, which is given generally in
a form that is not infallible. The full power of the Church to
teach with authority implies a corresponding duty of the faithful
to assent to her teachings as far as this is possible. Does not
the scientific specialist think himself obliged to accept a proposition
on the strength of a certain authority, even if the latter's infallibility
is not established? He reads in his scientific periodical
and finds in it the report of special researches made by a colleague.
He cannot examine them over again, yet he accepts them
because of the reliability of his colleague, in which he sees the
guarantee of truth. Likewise, only more so, does the Catholic
owe it to his sense of truth to impose upon himself an
assent even where the representatives of the teaching authority
of the Church are not endowed in their decision with the gift of
infallibility. For he knows that even in such teachings the
Church is commonly under the guidance of the Holy Ghost, who
will seldom tolerate error. He is promised to the teaching
Church for the safe guidance of the faithful; these declarations
are, however, the ordinary doctrinal utterances of that ecclesiastical
office. And the Holy Ghost cannot permit that the teaching
authority should by a wrong decision forfeit the confidence
it enjoys.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, this authority ranks very high even when looked at
from a purely human standpoint. Those who are invested
with it are mostly men of great learning, competent to give
such doctrinal decisions by virtue of their experience and position,
and learned advisers are at their side. They are guided by
the tradition and wisdom of a universal Church, which measures
its history by thousands of years: the decisions, too, are
for the most part but the application or repetition of previous
doctrinal utterances. Besides, there is the hesitating caution
which advances to a decision only after long deliberations, and
in undemonstrated matters usually refrains from decision; a
caution which has increased still more in recent times, since so
<pb n='101'/><anchor id='Pg101'/>
many subtle questions have arisen on the boundaries of science
and faith. It is also known that many inquisitive eyes are constantly
turned on Rome, and a single wrong decision might entail
most disagreeable consequences for friend and foe. The
pressure must be very great before a much-disputed question is
taken up at all.
</p>

<p>
Of course it is by no means impossible that difficulties may
pile up in such a way that an error may really be made. History
knows of such a case. But the very fact that the one case of
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> is always quoted, and, therefore, that in the long history
of the Congregations this is considered to be almost the only
case of importance, is a proof how carefully the Congregations
proceed, and that supernatural aid is granted them. An institution
which in the course of its long existence had to reply to
innumerable questions and against which only one wrong decision
of importance can be pointed out, must necessarily be
an exemplary institution. An institution so free from human
error must surely be guided by the Holy Ghost. Compare with
this the many cases in which science has had to correct itself,
had to abandon its long-championed propositions as untenable.
</p>

<p>
Thus, in a given case, the decision is not difficult for the
Catholic. On one side stand the representatives of a science
which has erred, very often, incomparably more frequently than
the ecclesiastical teaching authority, and which lacks the
special aid of God. On the other side is the ecclesiastical
authority, which has almost never erred, and which
enjoys special divine aid; moreover, it examines into its questions
with greater caution and care, because it has more to lose.
In addition it is almost invariably able to point to a large
number, and frequently the majority, of savants who indorse its
decisions, because these mostly concern disputed questions not
yet scientifically determined. Hence the Catholic will find
no difficulty in presuming that the decision is in accord with
the truth; the more so because, as a rule, he himself is unable
to examine scientifically both sides of the question.
</p>

<p>
Should any one, nevertheless, be clearly convinced, by substantial
and valid reasons, that there has been prejudgment, then
he would not be any longer obliged to give it his interior
<pb n='102'/><anchor id='Pg102'/>
assent: truth before all else. It would be easy, too, by presenting
reliable information to an authoritative quarter, to secure
the triumph of the truth. However, in this case a man must
be ever on his guard against the tendency to overrate his own
arguments. In excitement he easily thinks himself to be certainly
in the right, but when considering the matter quietly
before God and his conscience, he will rarely come to the conclusion
that it would be wise to set his judgment above the decision.
In the case of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> the decision of the Congregation
was by no means opposed by a clear conviction of the truth
of the opposite.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Take, for instance, a more recent decision of the Congregation, forbidding
craniotomy. It has often been denounced. The question was
submitted to the Congregation of the Holy Office whether it were permissible
to teach that craniotomy is allowable in case the mother cannot
give birth to the child, and that both will have to die unless the
child be killed and removed by a surgical operation. The Congregation
answered twice in the negative, in May and August, 1889.
Neither craniotomy, nor any operation implying the direct murder of
the child or mother can be taught to be permissible. The reason on
which the answers were based is that the direct murder of an innocent
person in order to save human life is never allowable; and this applies
to the murder of a child, which has as much right to its life as any
other person. In the case of craniotomy we have the direct murder
of the child. We, too, shall have to admit, if we judge according to
the objective morality of the action, that the Congregation is in the
right; though it may seem hard to let both mother and child die
rather than take a life directly, we shall have to admit that it
is more in accord with the sanctity of the moral law than the opposite,
though the latter may seem preferable to medical practice. Viewed
in the interest of truth and the purity of the moral law, it is gratifying
to know that there is a court courageous enough to uphold this
law always and everywhere, even when it becomes hard.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
So much about assenting to doctrinal decisions that are not
infallible.
</p>

<p>
In regard to <emph>infallible</emph> decisions, the Catholic knows that
there are certain truths which no result of science can contradict.
To these decisions he owes unconditional submission, and he
gives it with conviction: he knows the promise, <q>I am with you
always, even unto the consummation of the world.</q> New decisions
of this kind are very rare. When the dogma of the
Infallibility of the Pope was proclaimed in 1870, the fear
<pb n='103'/><anchor id='Pg103'/>
was frequently expressed that the Head of the Roman Church
would hasten to make the fullest use of this prerogative, by erecting
theological barriers at all nooks and corners in the realm of
thought. The fear did not come true; it was unfounded.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A Protestant scientist wrote recently: <q>Those who thought <hi rend='italic'>Doellinger's</hi>
prediction of a prolific crop of dogmas would come true were
disappointed. There has been no new dogma pronounced since 1870,
although there were many pious opinions that certain circles would
have been only too glad to see confirmed. On looking calmly at the
dogma of infallibility it is seen that it was, after all, not so bad
as had been feared during the first excitement</q> (<hi rend='italic'>K. Holl</hi>, Modernismus,
1908, p. 9, Religionsgesch. Volksbuecher, IV, 7, Heft).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We may get a good idea of the precaution taken prior to the
proclamation of an infallible decision by perusing the History of
the Vatican Council, published by <hi rend='italic'>Granderath</hi>, in three volumes.
He describes the proceedings with conscientious objectiveness.
He shows how minutely all questions had been previously
studied, with all the available means of scientific investigation,
and how minutely and freely they were discussed by the most
venerable representatives of the Catholic world.
</p>

<p>
Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Gibbons</hi>, Archbishop of Baltimore, gave his impressions
of the Vatican Council as follows:
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>I happened to be the youngest Bishop that attended the
Council of the Vatican, and, while my youth and inexperience
imposed on me a discreet silence among my elders, I do not
remember to have missed a single session, and I was an attentive
listener at all the debates.... I think I am not exaggerating
when I say that the Council of the Vatican has been excelled
by few, if any, deliberative assemblies, civil or ecclesiastical,
that have ever met, whether we consider the <emph>maturity</emph> of years
of its members, their <emph>learning</emph>, their <emph>experience</emph> and <emph>piety</emph>, or
the widespread influence of the <hi rend='italic'>Decrees</hi> that they framed for the
spiritual and moral welfare of the Christian Republic.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>The youngest Bishop in the Council was thirty-six years
old. Fully three-fourths of the Prelates ranged between fifty-six
and ninety years. The great majority, therefore, had grown
gray in the service of their Divine Master. Several Fathers of
the Church, bent with age, might be seen passing through St.
<pb n='104'/><anchor id='Pg104'/>
Peter's Basilica to the council chamber every morning, leaning
with one hand on their staff, the other resting on the shoulder
of their secretary. One or two blind Bishops could be observed,
guided by their servants, as they advanced to their posts
with tottering steps, determined to aid the Church in their declining
years by the wisdom of their counsel, as they had consecrated
to her their vigorous manhood by their Apostolic labours.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>But to the gravity of years the members of the Council generally
united profound and varied learning....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q rend='pre'>They were men, too, of world-wide experience and close observation.
Each Bishop brought with him an intimate knowledge
of the history of his country and of the religious, moral,
social, and political condition of the people among whom he lived.
One could learn more from an hour's interview with this living
encyclopædia of divines, who were a world in miniature, than
from a week's study of books.... The most ample liberty of
discussion prevailed in the Council. This freedom the Holy
Father pledged at the opening of the synod, and the pledge was
religiously kept. I can safely say that neither in the British
House of Commons, nor in the French Chambers, nor in the
German Reichstag, nor in our American Congress, would a
wider liberty of debate be tolerated than was granted in the
Vatican Council. The presiding Cardinal exhibited a courtesy
of manner and a forbearance even in the heat of debate that was
worthy of all praise. I do not think that he called a speaker
to order more than a dozen times during the eighty-nine sessions,
and then only in deference to the dissenting murmurs
or demands of some Bishops. A Prelate representing the smallest
diocese had the same rights that were accorded to the highest
dignitary in the Chamber. There was no limit prescribed as
to the length of the speeches. We may judge of the wide scope
of discussion from the single fact that the debate on the Infallibility
of the Pope lasted two months, occupying twenty-five sessions,
and was participated in by one hundred and twenty-five
Prelates, not counting one hundred others who handed in written
observations. No stone was left unturned, no text of Sacred
Scripture, no passage in the writings of the Fathers, no page
of Ecclesiastical History bearing on the subject, escaped the
<pb n='105'/><anchor id='Pg105'/>
vigilant investigations of the Bishops, so that the whole truth
of God might be brought to light....</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The most important debate in the Council was that on the
Infallibility of the Pope. It may be proper to observe here that
the discussion was rather on the expediency or opportuneness of
defining the dogma than on the intrinsic truth of the doctrine
itself. The number of Prelates who questioned the claim of
Papal Infallibility could be counted on the fingers of a single
hand. Many of the speakers, indeed, impugned the dogma, not
because they did not personally accept it, but with the view of
pointing out the difficulties with which the teaching body of the
Church would have to contend in vindicating it before the world.
I have listened in the council chamber to far more subtle, more
plausible, and more searching objections against this prerogative
of the Pope than I have ever read or heard from the pen or
tongue of the most learned and formidable Protestant assailant</q>
(North American Review, April, 1894).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Obedience of Faith and Freedom of Action.</head>

<p>
In looking back at what has been said, we see the justice
of the question: where is here any real injury to lawful freedom
in thought and scientific research? In most of the
profane sciences the scientist receives no directions from the
authority of faith; he is altogether free, as long as he
keeps within his province. In some matters he is given a
list of errors to beware of: these are in the first place the
great questions concerning views of the world and life, of
which, after all, it is very difficult to obtain scientific knowledge.
But here he knows, through the conviction he has of the
truth of his faith, that he is offered the truth free from error
and prejudice.
</p>

<p>
It is true, adhering to a religious authority implies restraint.
But it is only the restraint of truth. Truth does not lose its
claim upon the mind because it is offered to the latter by
a supernatural authority; much less does the Creator lose the
right to the tribute of homage of his rational creature; and this
tribute is rendered by voluntary submission to the revealed
<pb n='106'/><anchor id='Pg106'/>
truth. Upon the Church, however, has been laid the task of
preserving unadulterated the legacy of her Founder from generation
to generation. She is responsible before God and history
for the faithful presentation of the most sacred inheritance
of mankind. Therefore the Church must raise her voice when
the puny thoughts of men, called science and progress, rise
against the saving truth to disparage, to falsify, to annihilate
it. <emph>It is not science the Church opposes, but error</emph>; not
truth, but the emancipation of the human mind from God's
authority, an emancipation that is trying to hide its real self
under the guise of scientific truth.
</p>

<p>
<q>The Church,</q> says the Vatican Council (Sess. III, ch. 4),
<q>having received with her apostolic office to teach, the obligation
of preserving the legacy of the faith, has also the God-given right
and duty to condemn what is falsely called science, 'lest any
one be cheated by philosophy and vain deceit.'</q> That the denial
of the faith is flippantly called science does not alter the case.
What determines the attitude of the Church is not eagerness
to rule, not a propensity to apply force to the mind, but loyalty
to her vocation. If it is disagreeable for any superior to have
to correct those under him, then it requires an heroic strength
and courage to cry out time and again to the whole world
and its leading minds, <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Errastis</foreign>, you have erred! It requires
heroism to reject, to oppose and condemn, time and again, propositions
sailing under the flag of progress, light and enlightenment,
in spite of the protest of those concerned, who denounce
whatever opposes them as darkness and retrogression. How
much easier it would be to fawn upon the pet ideas of the
age, Neo-protestantism and Modernism, and thus to gain their
approval, than to hear repeatedly the distressing words, <q>We
will not have her to rule over us&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>crucifige, crucifige</foreign>!</q>
</p>

<p>
But why not let <emph>science correct itself</emph>? Why these violent
condemnations and indictments? Science, by virtue of its instinct
for the truth will by itself find the way back, when it
has gone on the wrong track; only be patient. Science has in
itself the cure for all its defects. Has it not already all by
itself overcome numerous errors in the course of the centuries?
Indeed, were there nothing at stake but scientific theories they
<pb n='107'/><anchor id='Pg107'/>
might be readily left to themselves: the loss to mankind would
not be great. But here there are more important issues at stake.
The protection of the faith, of truths of the vastest importance
for Christian life and the souls of men. And it is the duty of the
Church to protect her charges from going astray, from dangers
to salvation. How many thousands of them would suffer harm
before it would please science to correct its heresies! It often
takes a long time to pull down the idols placed upon pedestals,
and then it may be only to erect another idol. How long will
it take modern philosophy to agree that the will of man is free,
that there is a substantial immortal soul, that a Creator of
the world dwells above the heavens? Is the Church to wait till
the men of science make up their minds to desist from denying
the existence of a personal God, and to bow before the Creator
of heaven and earth? Should she meanwhile look on calmly how
such ruinous doctrines are pervading and penetrating society
deeper and deeper? Souls cannot wait thus to suffer shipwreck.
Finally, the duty to believe remains the same for all, for the
scientist, too&mdash;he is not free to delay his assent until he has
exhausted all his antagonistic scientific experiments.
</p>

<p>
To be sure, the scientist is restricted in so far as he is
not allowed to pursue any and every hypothesis, regardless
of the immutable truth; he may no longer follow every
scientific fashion. But is this a real detriment to the human
intellect and science? Has not every science to bear <emph>restraint
from other sciences</emph> at all times? The adherent of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi>
theory of natural selection needs a billion years for his slow
evolution; but the geologist tells him that neither the formation
of the earth's surface nor the strata or sub-strata have taken
so long in formation&mdash;he corrects him. When the philosopher,
drawing the logical deductions from his materialistic views of
the world, assumes that the first living being sprang from lifeless
matter, the naturalist informs him that this is contradicted by
facts&mdash;there never has been a case of spontaneous generation.
The naturalist is corrected by the better experiment of men of
his profession, the scientific author is corrected by his critic.
Hence if a man submits to the guidance of other men of his profession,
if one science accepts direction from another science,
<pb n='108'/><anchor id='Pg108'/>
without any one seeing any injury to freedom therein, why, then,
should it be mental oppression for God's infallible wisdom to
call out through His Church to the fallible human mind: this is
error, I declare it so? When the guide-post points out to the
traveller that he is on the wrong way, will the wanderer indignantly
resent the correction as an interference with his freedom
of action? Is the railing along the steep precipice, to guard
against falling down, an interference with liberty? Is the
lighthouse, warning the sailor of cliffs and shoals, any interference
with his freedom?
</p>

<p>
Generally those who oppose the Christian and Catholic duty
to believe use the following argument: Where there is restraint
and dependence there is no freedom; the Christian, and especially
the Catholic, is restrained and dependent; hence he is
not free: consequently he has no true science, because there can
be no true science without freedom. In the same way it may
be argued: The civilized nation is restrained in various ways by
the civil order, therefore it is not free. The careful writer of
scientific works is tied down on all sides by the rules of logic,
by the dictates of good style, by scientific usages: hence he is
not free.
</p>

<p>
Let us not lose sight of the question. It cannot be denied
that the man who does not bother about faith has a greater
outer freedom than the man who does. We speak purposely of
outer freedom. It is quite another question, where real internal
freedom exists, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, freedom from the fetters of one's own
inclinations and prejudices,&mdash;in the religiously disciplined
mind, or in the other. Here we speak of inner freedom. Obviously
it is greater in the former. The deer in the forest is freer
in his movements than the cautious mountain-climber, who keeps
to marked roads and paths, so as to journey safely, yet the latter
is not without freedom. Nor will any one deny that the Australian
bushman enjoys a greater outer freedom than the civilized
white, restrained by laws, by rules and regulations, by standards
of decency. And the busy writer of many things and everything,
who in his writing never pays any attention to logic, to scientific
form, to style and tact, has more freedom than one who strictly
conforms to all these.
</p>

<pb n='109'/><anchor id='Pg109'/>

<p>
<emph>Every civilization, culture, and education implies
restriction of freedom</emph>, and the more the rejection of dependence
and laws increases the nearer we approach the state of uncultured
and barbarous nations. The same applies to intellectual
culture. The higher it is, the more learning and mental
culture a man has, the greater the number of truths, principles,
and intellectual standards he carries within him. By these he
is bound if he wants to advance into the higher spheres of
intellectuality. And the more the intellect rejects laws and
standards the more unregulated and dull its intellectual life
will become. The more one knows the more strictly is he bound
to truth in every respect; the less one knows the freer he is to
commit errors. This is no advantage, it is the privilege of the
ignorant and untrained mind. The believer is bound by religious
truth in the same way as one who knows the truth is
bound by it, while one who is ignorant of it is not.
</p>

<p>
It is certainly not impossible for the obedience of faith to
create <emph>intellectual conflict</emph>. There may be cases when
scientific views look probable to the scientist, while they contradict
a doctrine of faith or an ecclesiastical decision. The roads
may even cross more radically. It may happen that his views
and books are condemned, forbidden by the Church.
</p>

<p>
If the conflicting doctrine should be an <emph>infallible</emph> one, the
decision of the believing scientist is soon reached. He knows
now what to think of his hypothesis, that it is not true progress
but aberration, and consistency with his own conviction moves
him to desist. Thus the philosophical errors of modern times
are opposed almost throughout to infallible dogmas, for the
most part fundamental doctrines of the Christian religion. This
is also the legal right under which revelation and the Church approach
the scientist with the demand not to permit his views
to go contrary to faith, because there can never be a contradiction
between faith and reason. <q>There can never be a
contradiction between faith and reason,</q> the Vatican Council
teaches; <q>the apparent conflict is due either to the doctrine
not being understood and interpreted in the sense of the
Church, or to erroneous opinions that are mistaken for conclusions
of reason</q> (Conc. Vat. sess. III, cp. 4). If the Catholic
<pb n='110'/><anchor id='Pg110'/>
finds his position opposed to <emph>non-infallible</emph> decisions,
then he will re-examine his views in unselfish impartiality before
God. If he must calmly tell himself that his arguments are not
so weighty as to be able to stand up before so high an authority,
guided by the Holy Ghost, then he will forego the gratification
of holding fast to his own opinions, and will remind himself that
true wisdom knows the fallibility of the human mind, and is
ever ready to take advice from a divinely guided authority. Perhaps
he will recall the words of the great <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>: <q>Better
bow before an incomprehensible but saving symbol than entangle
one's neck in the meshes of error</q> (De doctr. Christ. III, 13).
This Christian self-denial surpasses in beauty even science itself,
and sheds upon it a greater splendour.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The great <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon</hi>, proceeding to his pulpit in the cathedral of Cambrai,
on Annunciation day in 1699, was handed by his brother the Roman
brief condemning twenty-three propositions of <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon's</hi> <q>Maximes des
Saints.</q> The Bishop took the writing, calmly ascended the pulpit and
announced it forthwith, and preached a sermon on the submission due
to ecclesiastical superiors, at which the whole congregation was greatly
moved. A few days later he announced in an episcopal letter to his
diocese his submission, <q>simple, absolute, and without a shadow of reservation.</q>
By this deed, an heroic act of obedience, <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon</hi> is placed
higher in history than by his brilliant works, than by the honour of
having been the illustrious tutor of the Dauphin of France.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Antonio Rosmini-Serbati</hi> in August, 1849, received official notice of
the condemnation of two of his works by the Congregation of the Index.
He immediately sent in his submission: <q>With the sentiments of a true
and obedient son of the Apostolic See, that I have always been by the
grace of God and wish ever to be, and have ever acknowledged myself, I
now declare clearly and sincerely, without reservation, my submission, in
the most complete manner, to the condemnation of my writings.</q> Both
the condemnation and the submission were soon made the target of
attack by the Liberal press. <hi rend='italic'>Rosmini</hi> replied in an admirable open
letter: <q>To my great sorrow I have seen several articles in different
newspapers which dare criticize the Holy Congregation of the Index for
condemning my writings. Inasmuch as I have submitted to the decree
of the said Congregation with all sincerity, and with full interior and
exterior obedience as becomes a true son of the Church, every one will
easily understand how much I regret these articles and disapprove of
them. Yet I deem it not superfluous to declare expressly that I reject
those articles entirely and that I do not accept the praise for me which
they offer. With regard to other newspaper writers, who are censuring me
and even insulting me for having done what it was my duty to do, in
submitting to the condemnation, as though I had committed a crime, I
can only say that I greatly pity them, and that they would fill me with
<pb n='111'/><anchor id='Pg111'/>
contempt could I deem it permissible to despise any one</q> (apud <hi rend='italic'>J.
Hilgers</hi>, Der Index der verbotenen Buecher, 1904, 413).
</p>

<p>
A <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon</hi> or a <hi rend='italic'>Rosmini</hi>, bowing with the humility of the Christian
savant to the judgment of their Church, have thereby forfeited nothing
of their intellectual fame in the eyes of earnest critics, but, on the contrary,
have greatly increased the respect for their noble character.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Even should the future prove as scientifically correct that
which the believing scientist does not as yet clearly see, that he
was scientifically in the right, no considerable damage would
result to science. Providence, which guides human affairs, will
protect science for its noble modesty in submitting meanwhile
to an authority appointed by God. As a matter of fact, science
cannot be shown ever to have suffered any real loss by such
submission, not even in the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> case, as we shall see further
on. On the other hand, countless are the errors and injuries
which have befallen human thought and belief, and which the
Church has warded off from those who yielded to her guidance.
Of course the submission may become difficult if a man clings
to his views, or has already publicly proclaimed them. Then,
indeed, a bitter struggle may ensue. A number of scientists
have failed to stand the test and have left to posterity the ill-fated
name of apostates. The Church regrets such cases; but
the deposit of faith is too precious to be endangered for the sake
of any individual.
</p>

<p>
For this reason the Church is and must be <emph>conservative</emph>; for
this reason she may have to warn against the dissemination of
propositions which may not in themselves be false, but fraught
with danger for the time being. She cannot take part in any
hasty effort to make experiments, risking everything inherited
in order to try something new.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
During the nineteenth century the United States was repeatedly the
scene of communistic experiments. Daring adventurers assembled people
and founded settlements on communistic principles, private property
being abolished. In 1824 <hi rend='italic'>Robert Owen</hi> founded a colony in Indiana,
which soon grew to nine hundred members, living in the fashion of atheistic
communism. In 1825 the colony adopted its first constitution,
which within the following year suffered six complete revisions. In June
of the second year the last members of the colony ate their farewell
dinner together. The experiment had come to a speedy termination. A
Frenchman, <hi rend='italic'>Etienne Cabet</hi>, founded, in 1848, a new colony in Texas,
called Icaria. Soon it numbered 500 members. Each family had its small
<pb n='112'/><anchor id='Pg112'/>
homestead. Children were educated by the community. Amusement
was provided for by a band and a theatre; a library supplied more intellectual
wants. But soon it all fell into decay. <hi rend='italic'>Cabet</hi> departed and
died. In 1895 the newspapers reported the dissolution of the last remnant
of the colony. Such is the fate of experiments.
</p>

<p>
Daring adventurers may undertake them. The lecturer at college,
too, will be readily pardoned for his eagerness to take up the cudgel in
defence of what is new in his profane science: he may easily correct himself.
But the Teacher of the Centuries and of the Nations, in the sphere
of religion and morals, has not the right to experiment. Here, where
mistakes may entail the direst consequences, the rule must be: slowly
onward, to keep the whole from ruin. Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Benedict Gaetani</hi>, later
Pope <hi rend='italic'>Boniface VIII.</hi>, once praised Rome for having <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pedes non plumeos
sed plumbeos</foreign>&mdash;not winged feet, but leaden heels.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Sentiments of the kind just set forth are of course possible
only in conjunction with the belief in a revelation and in the
supernatural character of the Church, where the interests of
faith come first, and must be unconditionally preserved. He
who lacks this conviction, he to whom the Church is but a
human institution, founded in the course of time, tending perhaps
to oppose truth and science for fear they might endanger
the submission of minds&mdash;to such a one the Catholic's
confident devotion to his Church, and consciousness of unimpaired
freedom at the same time, will be unintelligible; and the
inflexibility of the Church in defending the faith will pass his
comprehension. And woe to the Church when her position
toward science is being tried before this court: only harsh denunciations
are to be expected where the judge does not understand
the matter he undertakes to decide.
</p>

<p>
Nor do we attempt to bridge the chasm that separates the two
views of the world which we here again encounter, the one, which
rejects the supernatural world, the other, the view of the believing
Christian. We have but endeavoured to show that <emph>faith
does not restrain the mental freedom of one who is convinced
of the truth of his faith</emph>. Submission to the authority
of faith is the consequence of his conviction. This is the
question to be decided: Either there is a revelation and a
Church founded by God, or there is not. If such there be, or
if it is only possible, then modern freedom of thought, with its
demand of exemption from all authority, is against reason and
morality. If there is not, then this should be proved. It can
<pb n='113'/><anchor id='Pg113'/>
be done consistently only by acknowledging atheism. For if
there is a personal God, then He can give a revelation and found
a Church, and demand submission from all. Since the days of
<hi rend='italic'>Celsus</hi> to this day the attempt to demonstrate that the convictions
of a faithful Christian are unjustifiable has proved futile.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Obedience of Faith and Injury to Science.</head>

<p>
While all this is true, yet one may not share this conviction,
nor rise to the certainty that there is a supernatural world
whence the Son of God descended to teach man and to found an
infallible Church. Still, to be fair, he must admit that no real
danger to freedom of research and progress of science results
from submission to faith, as shown above.
</p>

<p>
In the first place it must be admitted that the assertion is still
unproved, that a positive result of research has ever come in
hopeless conflict with a dogma of faith; hence that science
has been prevented from accepting this result. No such case
can be found. The condemnation of the Copernican view
of the world will be considered presently; we pass over the fact
that at the time of its condemnation it was not a positive result
of science: the main point is that the condemnation was not an
irrevocable dogma of faith, but only the decision of a Congregation,
which was withdrawn as soon as the truth was clearly
demonstrated. Besides, science has suffered no injury from that
decision.
</p>

<p>
In general, where there is real contradiction between science
and faith, the matters in question are invariably <emph>hypotheses</emph>.
Is it more than an hypothesis, and a very doubtful hypothesis
at that, that the world and God are identical, that there
is an eternal, uncreated course of the world, that miracles
are impossible? That what is said about the natural origin of
Christianity, the origin of the Jewish religion from Babylonian
myths, the origin of all religions from fear, fancy, or deception,
is it anything more than hypothetical? The false systems of
knowledge, subjectivism, and agnosticism&mdash;are they more than
hypotheses? Ask their originators and champions; they will
admit it themselves; and if they will not admit it, others will
<pb n='114'/><anchor id='Pg114'/>
tell them that their propositions are not only hypotheses, but
often quite untenable. There is hardly a single hypothesis which
has not its vehement opponents. That the serious conflict between
dogma and science is waged only in this field could be
proved by abundant examples. Besides, is it not the philosophical
axiom of modern freedom of thought, that in the
sphere of philosophy and religion there is no certain knowledge,
but only supposition?
</p>

<p>
Can hypotheses claim to rank as assured results of research
which should be universally accepted? Why should it not be allowed
to contradict them, to oppose them with other suppositions?
Is it not in the interest of science that this be done, that
they be subjected to sharp criticism, lest they gradually be given
out for positive results? Is it not a shameful trifling with the
truth, when a <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> deceives wide circles by pretending that
most frivolous hypotheses are established results of science?
Is it not misleading when modern science treats the rejection of
a supernatural order as an established principle?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
And how often the hypotheses of profane sciences change! <q>Laymen
are astonished,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>H. Poincaré</hi>, <q>that so many scientific theories are
perishable. They see them thrive for a few years, to be abandoned one
after the other; they see wrecks heaped upon wrecks; they foresee that
theories now fashionable will after a short while be forgotten, and they
conclude that these theories are absolute fallacy. They call it the bankruptcy
of science</q> (Wissenschaft u. Hypothese, German by <hi rend='italic'>F. Lindemann</hi>,
2d ed., 1906, 161). The conclusion is certainly unjustified, but
the fact itself remains. Is it then a loss to science when faith opposes
in the field of religion these variations of opinion with fixed dogmas?
</p>

<p>
Or are these perhaps of less worth, or less certain than their contraries?
Is the dogma of the existence of God of less value than
atheism? Is the conviction of the existence of a world of spirits less
substantial than the philosophy of materialistic monism? Is the doctrine
of the origin of the human soul from the creating hand of God
found inferior to the notion that the soul has developed from the lower
stages of animal life? Should the holy teaching of Christianity, doctrines
believed by the best periods in the world's history, believed in and
professed by minds like those of an <hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi>, a <hi rend='italic'>Thomas</hi>, and a <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi>;
doctrines that since their appearance on earth have always attracted
the noble and good, and repelled chiefly the base and immoral; doctrines
that still wait for their first unobjectionable refutation&mdash;should such
doctrines be less sure than the innumerable, ever-changing suggestions
of unregulated thought, apparently directed by an aversion to everything
supernatural?
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='115'/><anchor id='Pg115'/>

<div>
<head>Erravimus.</head>

<p>
Yet another fact may be pointed out. It is an undeniable
fact that science, after straying for some time, is not unfrequently
<emph>compelled to return to what is taught by faith
and the Church</emph>, thus confirming the truth of the faith. Frequently
the new theory has come on like a tornado, sweeping all
minds before it. But the tempest was soon spent, the minds
recovered their balance and the hasty misjudgment was
recognized.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Not long ago, when materialism revelled in its orgies, especially in
Germany, when <hi rend='italic'>Vogt</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Buechner</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Moleschott</hi> were writing their
books, and science with <hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi> was hunting <hi rend='italic'>Laplace's</hi> theory
in the evolution of the world, the Syllabus, undaunted, put its anathema
upon the (58.) proposition: <q>No other forces are acknowledged
but those of matter.</q> The summer-night's dream came to an
end, and people rubbed their eyes and saw the reality they had lost a
while. The materialism of the 60's and 70's has been discarded by the
scientific world, and finds a shelter only in the circles of unschooled
infidelity. <hi rend='italic'>J. Reinke</hi>, in the name of biology, bears testimony in the
words: <q>In my opinion materialism has been disposed of in biology;
if, nevertheless, a number of biologists still stand by its colours, this
tenacity may be explained psychologically; for, in the apt words of
<hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi>, in the domain of ideas a man does not willingly and
easily forsake the highway of thought which his entire mental training
has opened up</q> (Einleitung in die theoretische Biologie, 1901, 52).
</p>

<p>
A few decades ago a number of scientists declared it impossible that
the different races could have descended from one pair of ancestors, as
taught by faith: the difference between the various families being too
great and radical, it was said; the difference being rather of species
than of race. Moreover, there was announced the discovery of people
without religion, without notions of morality and family life; of
tribes incapable of civilization and culture; it was asserted in the
early days of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> enthusiasm that there had been discovered a race
of men that clearly belonged to the species ape. Assertions of this
kind have gradually ceased. Now the different human races are considered
to belong to the same species, and their common parentage is
considered possible from the view-point of the theory of evolution. The
anthropologist <hi rend='italic'>Ranke</hi> expresses his opinion thus: <q>We find the bodily
differences perfectly connected by intermediate forms, graded to a
nicety, and the summary of the differences appears to point to but one
species.... This is the prevalent opinion of all independent research
of anatomically schooled anthropologists</q> (Der Mensch, 2d ed., II,
1894, 261). Ethnology denies the existence of nations or tribes without
religion (<hi rend='italic'>Ratzel</hi>, Voelkerkunde, I, 1885, 31). <hi rend='italic'>Peschel</hi> says: <q>The
statement that any nation or tribe has ever been found anywhere on
<pb n='116'/><anchor id='Pg116'/>
earth without notions and suggestions of religion can be denied emphatically</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>O. Peschel</hi>, Voelkerkunde, 6th ed., 1885, 273). <q>The
more recent ethnology knows of no tribes without morality, nor does
history record any</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. Schneider</hi>, Die Naturvoelker, 1886, II, 348).
</p>

<p>
Until a short time ago it was believed that the derivation of man's
life from inferior stages of animal life would not be difficult to prove;
but at present, while many still adhere to the theory that man has developed
from the brute, the conviction is steadily gaining ground that it
cannot be scientifically proved and that it becomes more and more difficult
to disprove man's higher origin. Unable to withstand the force of
facts, one hypothesis gives place to another: what had to be found
could not be found, living or extinct links between the brute and
man refused to appear anywhere, and those which people thought they
had found, turned out to be unsuitable. <hi rend='italic'>Kohlbrugge</hi> concludes his
criticism of the recent theories of the evolution of the body of man
from lower animals with the confession: <q>The above summary is
enough to convince everybody that we do not know anything distinct
about the great problem of evolution; we have not yet seen its face.
All must be done over again</q> (Die Morpholog. Abstammung des
Menschen, 1908, 88). <hi rend='italic'>Virchow</hi> said at the anthropological congress of
Vienna, 1889: <q>When we met at Innsbruck twenty years ago Darwinism
had just finished its first triumphal march through the world,
and my friend <hi rend='italic'>Vogt</hi> became its ardent champion. We have searched in
vain for the missing link connecting man directly with the ape.</q>
</p>

<p>
What has become of those anatomic-morphologic links between man
and beast, the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>pithecanthropus erectus</foreign>, the man dug out at Neandertal,
Spy, Schipka, La Naulette, and Krapina, and shown with great
confidence to the world? What has become of the prehistoric man, said
to belong to the glacial period of Europe, and to have ranked far below
the present man? <hi rend='italic'>J. Kohlmann</hi> writes: <q>I wish to state that I thoroughly
adhere to the theory of evolution, but my own experience has
led me to the result that man has not changed his racial characteristics
since the glacial period. He appears on the soil of Europe physically
complete, and there is no ape-man to be found</q> (apud <hi rend='italic'>Ranke</hi>, Ibid.
480). Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Branco</hi>, director of the Palæontological Institute of Berlin,
says: <q>Palæontology tells us nothing about the missing link. This
science knows of no ancestors of man</q> (at the 5th international Zoological
Congress, 1901, <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>, Die mod. Biolog. 3, p. 488). And
the palæontologist <hi rend='italic'>Zittel</hi> says: <q>The missing link between man and ape,
though a postulate of the theory of evolution, has not been found</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Ranke</hi>, l. c. 504). <hi rend='italic'>E. Grosse</hi> concludes his studies on evolution with
the significant words: <q>I began this book with the intention of writing
a history of the evolution of the family, and I finish it convinced
that at present the writing of that history is impossible for me or for
anybody else</q> (Die Formen der Familie, 1896, Vorwort). <hi rend='italic'>Ranke</hi> is
perfectly right in saying that <q>it behoves the dignity of science to
confess that it knows nothing of the origin of man</q> (Thuermer V, 1902,
I. Heft).
</p>

<p>
A century ago or so, ridicule was heaped in the name of science on
the description in the Bible of the last day: <q>The stars shall fall,</q>
<q>and the powers of heaven shall be moved,</q> <q>the elements shall be
<pb n='117'/><anchor id='Pg117'/>
melted with heat, and the earth shall be burnt up</q> (Matt. xxiv. 29 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>;
Luke xxi. 25 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>; Mark xiii. 24 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>; 2 Pet. iii. 10). Then the assertion
that stones could fall from the skies caused a smile, but now science
has come to the general knowledge that this is not only possible, but
perhaps really will be the end of all things, if once our earth on its
journey through unknown spaces of the universe should collide with a
comet or get into a cosmic cloud of large meteors. (Cf. the graphic description
in <hi rend='italic'>K. Braun</hi>, Ueber Kosmogonie, 3d ed., 1905, p. 381 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>)
</p>

<p>
An example of another kind: It is not so long since Protestant,
liberal Bible-criticism and its history of early Christian literature,
in the endeavour to remove everything supernatural from the beginning
of Christianity, regarded the New Testament and the oldest Christian
documents as unreliable testimony, even forgeries, and for this reason
placed the date of their origin as late as possible. But now they have
to retrace their steps.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi> writes: <q>There was a period&mdash;the general public is still
living in it&mdash;when the New Testament and the oldest Christian literature
were thought to be but a tissue of lies and forgeries. This time has
passed. For science it was an episode in which much was learned of
which much must be forgotten. The result of subsequent research over-reaches
in a <q>reactionary</q> effect what might be termed the central position
of modern criticism. The oldest literature of the Church is in the
main and in most details true and reliable, that is, from the literary
and historical point of view.... I am not afraid to use the word <q>retrogressive</q>&mdash;for
we should call a spade a spade&mdash;the criticism of the
sources of the earliest Christianity is beyond doubt moving retrogressively
towards tradition</q> (Chronologie der Alt-Christ. Literatur I,
1897, VIII). In a more recent work the same savant writes: <q>During
the years from 30 to 70 all originated in Palestine, or, better, in Jerusalem,
what later on was developed. This knowledge is steadily gaining
and replacing the former <q>critical</q> opinion that the fundamental
development had extended over a period of about a hundred years</q>
(Lukas der Arzt, 1906, Vorwort). This retrogression is continued
still farther in his later work, <q>Neue Untersuchungen zur Apostolgesch.
u. zur Abfassungszeit der synopt. Evang., 1911,</q> in which <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> draws
very near to the Catholic view regarding the date of writing of the
Acts of the Apostles, as also regarding <hi rend='italic'>St. Paul's</hi> attitude towards Judaism
and Christian-Judaism, and departs from the modern Protestant
view (cf. pp. 28-47, 79 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>, 86, 93 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). <q>Protestant authorities on
church-history,</q> he says elsewhere, <q>no longer take offence at the proposition
that the main elements of Catholicism go back to the Apostolic
era, and not only peripherically</q> (Theol. Literar. Zeitung, 1905, 52).
</p>

<p>
In a speech, much commented on, which he made at his university
January 12, 1907, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>, discussing the religious question in
Germany, called attention to the fact that there has been quite a
marked return to the Catholic standpoint: <q>From the study of Church
history we find that we all have become different from what our fathers
were, whether we may like it or not. Study has shown that we are
separated from our fathers by a long course of development; that we
do not understand their ideas and words at all, much less do we use
them in the sense they used them.</q> He then draws out the comparison
<pb n='118'/><anchor id='Pg118'/>
more particularly: <q><hi rend='italic'>Flacius</hi> and the older Protestants denied
that <hi rend='italic'>Peter</hi> had ever been in Rome at all. Now we know that his having
been there is a fact well evidenced in history.</q> The motto of the older
Protestants was that the Scriptures are the sole source of revelation.
<q>But now, and for a long time past, Protestant savants have realized
that the Scriptures could not be separated from tradition, and that the
collecting of the New Testament Scriptures was a part of tradition.</q>
<q>Protestants of the sixteenth century taught justification by faith alone,
without works. In the absence of confessional controversy, no evangelical
Christian would now find fault with the teaching which declares
only such faith to be of any worth which shows itself by the love of
God and of the neighbour</q> (Protestantismus u. Katholizismus in
Deutschland, Preussisch. Jahrbücher 127. Bd., 1907, 301 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Many similar instances of science confessing Erravimus in
regard to the Christian or Catholic position could be cited.
They are an admonition to be modest, not to overrate the value
of a scientific proposition, and not, with supreme confidence and
infallibility, to brand it as an offence against the human intellect
to let one's self be guided by the principles of faith.
</p>

<p>
Moreover, it has often happened that science emphatically
and sneeringly rejected propositions, and called them false
and absurd, which to-day are considered elementary.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, in 1687, had correctly explained the revolution of
the moon around the earth, and of the planets around the sun,
as the co-operation of gravitation and inertia, and thence concluded
also the elliptic form of the orbits of planets previously
discovered by <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi> rejected this theory,
<hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi> called it absurd, and the Academy of Paris as late as
1730 still favoured the theory of revolution of <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi>; it
was only about the year 1740 that it was generally accepted.
<hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi>, himself, had formed in 1690 his theory about light-waves.
For a long time it was misunderstood. Only in 1800,
or somewhat later, it received its merited acknowledgment, but
noted physicists like <hi rend='italic'>Biot</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Brewster</hi> rejected it still for some
time and held to the theory of emission. <q>Even in the intellectual
world the law of inertia holds good</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Rosenberger</hi>, Gesch.
der Physik, III, 1887, 139).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The great discoverer <hi rend='italic'>Galvani</hi> complained of being attacked from two
opposite sides, by the scientists and by the ignorant: <q>Both make fun
of me. They call me the dancing master of frogs. Yet I know I have
discovered one of the greatest forces of nature.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='119'/><anchor id='Pg119'/>

<p>
When <hi rend='italic'>Benjamin Franklin</hi> explained the lightning-rod to the
Royal Academy of Sciences, he was ridiculed as a dreamer. The
same happened to <hi rend='italic'>Young</hi> with his theory of the undulation of
light. <q>The Edinburgh Review</q> proposed to the public to put
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Grey</hi> in a strait-jacket when he presented his plan
for railroads. Sir <hi rend='italic'>Humphry Davy</hi> laughed at the idea of illuminating
the city of London by gas. The French Academy of
Sciences actually sneered at the physicist <hi rend='italic'>Arago</hi> when he proposed
a resolution to merely open a discussion of the idea of
an electric telegraph (<hi rend='italic'>Wallace</hi>, Die wissensch. Ansicht des
Uebernatuerlichen, 102 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Until about a hundred years ago scientists almost universally
thought it impossible for a stone to fall from the skies&mdash;not to mention
a rain of stones. Of the big meteor that fell at Agram in 1751
the learned Vienna professor, <hi rend='italic'>Stuetz</hi>, wrote in 1790 as follows: <q>That
iron had fallen from the skies may have been believed in Germany in
1751 even by its enlightened minds, owing to the uncertainty then
prevailing in regard to physics and natural history. In our times,
however, it were unpardonable to consider similar fairy tales even probable.</q>
Some museums threw away their collections of meteors, fearing
they would appear ridiculous by keeping them. In that very year,
1790, a meteor fell near the city of Juillac in France, and the mayor of
the town sent a report of it to the French Academy of Sciences, signed
by three hundred eye-witnesses. But the wise men of the academy knew
better. Referee <hi rend='italic'>Bertholon</hi> said: <q>It is a pity for a town to have so
foolish a mayor,</q> and added: <q>It is sad to see the whole municipality
certifying by affidavit to a folk-saga that can only be pitied. What more
can I say of an affidavit like that? Comment is self-evident to a
philosophically trained mind who reads this authentic testimonial about
an evidently false fact, about a physically impossible phenomenon.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Deluc</hi>, in other respects a sober-minded man, and a scientist, even
remarked that should a stone like that fall before his feet, then he
would have to admit that he had seen it, but nevertheless would not believe
it. <hi rend='italic'>Vaudin</hi> remarked: <q>Better to deny such incredible things
than to have to try to explain them.</q> Thus taught the French Academy
of that time (apud <hi rend='italic'>Braun</hi>, Ueber Kosmogonie, 3d ed., 1905, 378 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
And now science is teaching the contrary. Everybody knows that such
falling meteors are not only possible, but that they fall about seven
hundred times a year on our earth.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Do not these examples bear a striking resemblance to the attitude
of many of the representatives of modern science towards
facts and truths of our faith?
</p>

<p>
This has not been said with a view of detracting from the
<pb n='120'/><anchor id='Pg120'/>
reputation of science. Not at all. It has fallen to the lot of
man to be subject to error. The above was said to recall that
fact. Science is not so infallible as to be able to claim the
right to ignore, in religious and ethical questions, faith and the
Church, and even to usurp the place of the faith given by God,
in order to lead its disciples upon the new paths of a delivered
mankind.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='121'/><anchor id='Pg121'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. Unprepossession Of Research.</head>

<div>
<head>What It Is.</head>

<p>
In the year 1901 a case, insignificant in itself, caused great
excitement in and even beyond the scientific world. What had
happened? At the University of Strassburg, in a territory for
the most part Catholic, no less than one-third of the students
were Catholic, yet of the seventy-two professors sixty-one
were Protestant, six Israelites and but four Catholics (according
to the report of the Secretary of State, <hi rend='italic'>Koeller</hi>, in the
115th session of the Reichstag, January 11, 1901). The government
resolved, in view of the state of affairs, to give more consideration,
when appointing professors, to the Catholic members
of the university. Even the non-Catholic members of the
Bundesrat desired it. A vacancy occurring in the faculty of
history, the government, besides appointing the Protestant professor
proposed by the faculty of philosophy, decided to create a
new chair to be filled by a Catholic.
</p>

<p>
The appointment of a Catholic professor of history was regarded
as seriously endangering science. The storm broke. The
venerable historian, <hi rend='italic'>Th. Mommsen</hi>, who had been a champion
of liberty in the revolution of 1848, promptly gave the alarm.
In the Munich <q>Neueste Nachrichten</q> there appeared over his
signature an article that created a general sensation. <q>German
university circles,</q> he said, in his solemn protest, <q>are pervaded
by a feeling of degradation. Our vital nerve is unprejudiced
research; research that does not find what it seeks
and expects to find, owing to purposes, considerations, and
restraints that serve other, practical ends extraneous to science&mdash;but
finds what logically and historically appears to the conscientious
scientist the right thing, truthfulness. The appointment
of a college teacher whose freedom is restricted by barriers
<pb n='122'/><anchor id='Pg122'/>
is laying the axe to the root of German science. The call
to a chair of history, or philosophy, of one who must be a Catholic
or a Protestant, and who must serve this or that confession,
is tantamount to compelling him to set bounds to his work
whenever the results might be awkward for a religious dogma.</q>
And he concludes with a ringing appeal for the solidarity
of the representatives of science: <q>Perhaps I am not deceived
in the hope of having given expression to the sentiments
of our colleagues.</q> This statement of the famous scientist,
conceived in the temper of his days of '48, was soon softened,
if not neutralized, by a subsequent statement from his pen. But
the spark had already started the fire. From most universities
there came letters of approval and praise of his courageous
stand, in behalf of the honour of the universities and of German
science. On the other hand, some gave vent to their regret
of his hot-spurred action. Since then the song of unprejudiced
science has been sung in countless variations and keys, ending
as a rule with the chorus: Hence the believing, especially
Catholics, cannot be true scientists. For this was the central idea
of <hi rend='italic'>Mommsen's</hi> protest, and in that sense it had been understood.
</p>

<p>
For the sake of clearness we shall condense the substance of
the thought into a brief form: The vital nerve of science, the
condition under which alone it can exist, is unprepossession,
that is, a straightforward honesty that knows of no
other consideration than to aim at the truth for its own sake.
The believer, the Catholic, cannot be unprepossessed, because
he must pay regard to dogmas and Church-doctrine and precept.
Therefore he is wanting in the most essential requisite
of true science. Hence college professors of a Catholic conviction
are anomalous: they have no right to claim a chair
in the home of unprepossessed science. For reasons of expediency
it may be advisable to appoint some of them, but they
cannot be regarded as sterling scientists. Catholic theology,
building upon faith, is not science in the true sense of the word,
and deserves no place in a university. A Catholic university, a
home of scientific research built upon a Catholic foundation, is
something like a squared circle. It may be that Catholic
scientists, too, have their achievements, but they cannot be
<pb n='123'/><anchor id='Pg123'/>
expected to be possessed of that unflinching pursuit of the
truth which must be part of the man of science.
</p>

<p>
These are thoughts which have petrified in the minds of many
into self-evident principles, with all the obstinacy of intolerance.
It is not difficult to recognize in it the old reproach we
have already dealt with, it is here in a slightly different form.
The believing scientist is not free to search for the truth, being
tied down by his duty to believe. Science, however, must be
free. Hence the believer cannot properly pursue science.
</p>

<p>
Freedom of science and science unprepossessed are related
terms and are often used synonymously. Therefore, in putting
the probe to the often-repeated demand for unprepossession, we
shall meet with ideas similar to those we have already discussed,
only in a slightly different shape.
</p>

<p>
What, then, is that unprepossession which science must avow?
Can the Catholic, the believing scientist, possess it? Unprepossessed
research&mdash;<q>I don't like the expression,</q> says a representative
of free-thought, <q>because it is a product of that
shortcoming which has already done great damage to free-thought
in its struggle with the powers of the past</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>).
Hence we have reason to fear that the confidence with which
this word is used is greater than the clearness of thought it
represents.
</p>

<p>
What is meant by saying that science must be <emph>unprepossessed</emph>?
Undoubtedly it means that science should make no
presuppositions, it must enter upon its work free from prejudice
and presumption. And what is presumption? Evidently
something presumed, upon which the research is to rest the level
and rule of its direction: the supposition being taken for
granted, without express proof. What I have expressly proved
in my process of thought is no longer a supposition to the
structure of thought, but a part of that structure.
</p>

<p>
Is the scientist, however, to allow no presumption at all?
That would be impossible. When making his calculations the
mathematician presupposes the correctness of the multiplication
table. Or is he first to prove that twice three are six? He could
not do it, because it is immediately self-evident. In his
optical experiments in the laboratory, in drawing inferences as
<pb n='124'/><anchor id='Pg124'/>
to the nature of light from different indications, the physicist
presupposes that senses are able to observe the facts correctly,
that everything has its respective reason, that nothing
can be and not be, at the same time, under the same conditions.
Can he or must he try first to prove it? He must presume it
because it is beyond a doubt, and because it cannot be proved at
all, at least all of it cannot. The astronomer, too, makes unhesitating
use of the formulas of mathematics without examining
them anew; every natural scientist calmly presupposes
the correctness of the results established by his predecessors and
goes on building upon those results: he may do so because he
cannot with reason doubt them. Hence presumptions are common;
they may be made when we are convinced of their truth;
they must be made because not everything can be proved. Much
cannot be proved because it is immediately self-evident, as, for
instance, the ability to recognize the true or the elementary
principles of reasoning; many other things cannot always be
proved minutely, because not every scientist cares to begin with
the egg of Leda. He that wants to build a house builds upon
a given base; if he will not accept it, if he desires to dig up
the fundament to the very bottom, in order to lay it anew, he will
be digging forever, but the house will never be built.
</p>

<p>
Hence to say that science must be unprepossessed cannot
mean that it must not make any presupposition. What, therefore,
does it mean? Simply this: <emph>Science must not presume
anything to be true which is false, nor anything as
proved which is still uncertain and unproved</emph>. Whatever
the scientist knows to be certain he may take as such, presuming
it as the foundation and direction of further work; and what he
knows to be probable he may suppose to be probable.
</p>

<p>
In so doing he in no way offends against the ideal that should
be ever-present to his mind&mdash;the truth, because he merely
allows himself to be guided by the truth, recognized as such.
And the sequence of truth cannot but be truth, the sequence of
certainty cannot but be certainty. But should he presuppose
to be true what is false and unproved, and the uncertain to be
certain, then he would offend against truth, against the aim of
every science.
</p>

<pb n='125'/><anchor id='Pg125'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Hence if the critic of the Bible presupposes miracles and prophecies to
be impossible, inferring therefrom that many narratives in Holy Writ
cannot be authentic, but must be legends of a later period, he is making
arbitrary presuppositions, he is not an unprepossessed scientist. Likewise,
if an historian presupposing God's supernatural providence over
the world to be impossible, and, in building upon this basis, comes to the
conclusion that the Christian religion grew from purely natural factors,
from Oriental notions and myths, from Greek philosophy and
Roman forms of government, he again makes unproved suppositions.
If the natural philosopher assumes that there cannot be a personal
Creator, and infers from it that the world is of itself and eternal, he
has forfeited the claim of being an unprepossessed scientist, and by
making in any way his own pet ideas the basis of his research he is
violating the demands of unprepossession; the results he arrives at are
not scientific results, but the speculations of an amateur.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Unprepossession and Religious Conviction.</head>

<p>
Is it possible for the Christian scientist who adheres to his
faith, to be unprepossessed, as demanded by science? According
to all that has been said hitherto about the relation of
science to faith, the answer can be only in the affirmative. The
believing Christian and Catholic looks upon the doctrines of
faith taught him by revelation and the Church as an <emph>established
truth</emph>. What to me is true and certain I can take for the true
and certain basis and standard of my thought. This is demanded
by unprepossession&mdash;nothing more.
</p>

<p>
Considering the immense extent of the sciences, the profane
sciences will but seldom, and in but few matters, have occasion
to presuppose truths of faith in the above-mentioned way; and
only in a negative form at that. We have previously shown
that the profane sciences must never take truths of faith for a
positive basis to build upon; they must regard the doctrines of
revelation only in so far as it is not allowed to teach anything
in contradiction to them. And with this demand they will meet
in rare instances only, because, if not overstepping their province,
they will very seldom come in touch with faith (cf. pp. 88-96).
When <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> was studying his planetary orbits, and <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>
discovered the law of gravitation, both worked independent of
the Christian view of the world which they both professed;
it was in no way a necessary presupposition to their research.
When <hi rend='italic'>Scheiner</hi> discovered the sun-spots, and <hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi> classified
<pb n='126'/><anchor id='Pg126'/>
the spectra of the stars, they were not doing so as Jesuits nor
as Catholics; as Mohammedans or atheists they might have
made the same discoveries. Steam engines and railways, <hi rend='italic'>Volta's</hi>
electricity, cathode-rays and X-rays, all discoveries that
the nineteenth century can boast of, do not depend directly on
any special view of the world.
</p>

<p>
And if the believing scientist does take his faith for a guide
in some matters, when in all his researches in the history
of the Christian religion and the Church he presupposes that
God's miraculous interference is not impossible, because the
contrary would offend not only against his faith, but also against
his common sense; when in pondering the ultimate reasons of all
things he allows himself to be influenced by the idea that atheism
is false, or at least not proved&mdash;for that there is a God both
his faith and his reason tell him&mdash;then these presumptions
are by no means inadmissible. The naturalist, too, presupposing
certain results of science to be true, takes care not
to get into conflict with them, and he will soon correct himself
should he arrive at different results. If a mathematician
should arrive at results conflicting with other proved results,
he would infer therefrom that his calculation was faulty; why,
then, cannot the Christian now and then be led by the truths
of his faith, of which he is certain, without by doing so offending
against the spirit of scientific truthfulness?
</p>

<p>
Or may he not do so just because they are <emph>religious</emph> truths,
vouched for by a supernatural authority? As a fact many of
them are established also by the testimony of reason. This is
shown by the examples just mentioned. However, the question
is not how a truth is vouched for, but whether it be a truth or
not. If the scientist is assured that something is unquestionably
true, then he owes it to the spirit of truthfulness to accept
it. In doing so he will in no way be unfaithful to his scientific
method; the truths of faith are to him not a source of
proofs for the results of his profane science, but only hints, calling
his attention to the fact that certain propositions are not
proved, that they are even false.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Much less is in historical questions the Catholic obliged to defend or
praise everything of advantage to his Church, whether true or not. Hence
<pb n='127'/><anchor id='Pg127'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Mommsen</hi> is grossly mistaken when he states in his letter of protest
mentioned above: <q>The appointment of a historian or philosopher, who
must be a Catholic or a Protestant and who must serve his confession,
evidently means nothing else but to prohibit the Protestant historian
from presenting the powerful mental structure of the papacy in its full
light, and the Catholic historian from appreciating the profound thought
and the tremendous importance of heresy and Protestantism.</q> The
Catholic is only bound to the truth.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Or are the Christian truths of faith perhaps regrettable
errors, hence presumptions that should not be made? If so,
demonstrate it. Hitherto such demonstration has not succeeded.
So long as the creed of the believing Christian cannot
be refuted convincingly, he has the right to cling to it in the
name of truth.
</p>

<p>
Or can we not have reasonable certainty at all in religious
matters? Are they the undemonstrable things of an uncontrollable
sentiment? To be sure, this is asserted often enough,
explicitly or by insinuation. If this were true, then of course
duty of faith and true unprepossession could not go together;
one would be regarding as the truth things of which one cannot
be convinced. But this is also an unproved assumption: it
is the duality of subjectivism and agnosticism, the fundamental
presumption of liberal freedom of science, which we have already
sufficiently exposed.
</p>

<p>
However, let us assume again the position of those who do
not feel themselves personally convinced of the truth of the
Christian dogmatic faith, or of the Catholic Church. But the
Catholic is <emph>firmly convinced</emph> thereof and, if need be, will
make sacrifices for this conviction, as millions have done.
Hence, can any one forbid him to think and judge according
to his conviction? Would they who differ from his opinion for
this very reason force him to think against his own conviction?
Would not that indeed be <q>seduction to sin against
the Holy Ghost</q>? If the jurist or historian has formed the
conviction that <hi rend='italic'>Mommsen</hi> is on historical questions concerning
Roman law an authority, who may be followed without scruple,
and he does so without re-examining the particular points, will
this be looked upon as an offence against unprepossession? If,
then, the Catholic is certain that he may safely trust to revelation
<pb n='128'/><anchor id='Pg128'/>
and the Church&mdash;and there is no authority on earth of more
venerable standing, even if viewed from a purely natural point&mdash;will
he alone be accused of mental blindness and lack of
freedom?
</p>

<p>
Or may the scientist have <emph>no view of the world</emph> at all,
because he might be influenced thereby in certain directions?
The champions of this demand will surely not admit that they
have not a definite view of the world. By no means! We know
very well that just those who are most vehement in urging
unprepossessed science have a very pronounced notion of the
world, we know also that they are resolutely propagating that
notion. Yet nothing is said against a scientist who is a
monist, or who starts from agnosticism. It seems they intend
to exclude one view only, the positive religious view. Yet not
even this one wholly. No one finds the Jew who adheres to his
religion unfit for scientific research. Of course not. Protestants,
too, find favour: according to the statutes of some German
universities Protestants only may be professors there.
Neither <hi rend='italic'>Mommsen</hi> nor any other herald of unprepossession deems
it necessary to defend science against these institutions and
usages. It is plain what is meant by the popular cry for science
unprepossessed: The man of science may be anything,
sceptic or atheist, pagan or Hottentot, only he must not be a
faithful Catholic. Is this fair? Is this the spirit of truth and
justice with which they claim to be filled?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
What has just been said about the Catholic being excluded, could
easily be exemplified by a lengthy list of facts. But we shall pass
them over. We shall note one utterance only, from the pen of a non-Catholic
writer. The renowned pedagogue, <hi rend='italic'>Fr. W. Foerster</hi>, says in the
preface to the second edition of his book on <q>Sexual Ethics and Sexual
Pedagogy</q>: <q>Special exception has been taken to the catholicizing tendency
of my book, and not infrequently the author has without further
ado been made out an orthodox Catholic. For many years past I
have been in a position to gain interesting information concerning the
incredible bias of many champions of unprepossessed research. To
them it is an a-priori dogma that everything represented by the Catholic
Church is nonsense, superstition, bigotry. They are past comprehending
how an unprejudiced man, simply by concrete experience, unprepossessed
research and serious pondering in the field of pedagogy,
could be brought to affirm that certain notions of the Roman Catholic
Church are the unavoidable consequence of a penetrating knowledge
<pb n='129'/><anchor id='Pg129'/>
of soul and life. This cannot be admitted by the non-Catholic: for him
the truth must cease where the Catholic faith begins; he dares not
assent to anything, else he will no longer be taken for a reputable scientific
man.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The bluster about unprepossession proceeds from <emph>shallowness
and dishonesty</emph>. The most varied presumptions, that
have nothing to do with science and the pursuit of the truth,
may pass without notice; only when Christian and Catholic
religious convictions, resting upon divine authority, are encountered,
then tolerance gives way to excitement, a hue and cry is
raised, the gate is shut, and entrance to the scientific world
denied.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Philosophers arise, and each philosophizes according to his manner.
<hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi> says: <q>What philosophy to choose depends on the kind of a
man one is.</q> The historian enters. It is reported that <hi rend='italic'>Treitschke</hi> said:
<q>If I cannot write history from my own view-point, with my own judgment,
then I had rather be a soapmaker.</q> According to trustworthy
testimony, the well-known Protestant historian, <hi rend='italic'>Giesebrecht</hi>, used to
preface his lectures in Munich with the words: <q>I am a Prussian and
a Protestant: I shall lecture accordingly</q> (Hochschulnachrichten,
1901, 2, p. 30). Even here there are no objections in the name of Unprepossession.
<q>Science,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>, <q>will tear off the mask of the
hypocrite or plagiarist and throw him out of the temple, but the queerest
suppositions it must let pass if they go by the name of convictions,
and if those who harbour them are trying to demonstrate them by scientific
means.</q>
</p>

<p>
Therefore the convictions, or, to speak with <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>, the <q>prejudices,</q>
of the Catholic <q>certainly deserve as much consideration and patience
as the velleities, idiosyncrasies, and blind dogmas which we have
to meet and refute in the struggle between intellects</q> (Internationale
Wochenschrift, 1908, 259 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). <q>Science has been restricted,</q> the same
authority also admits, <q>at all times; our progeny will find even modern
science in many ways not ruled by pure reason only</q> (Dogmengesch.
III, 3d ed., 1907, 326).
</p>

<p>
And what is to be said of those more serious suppositions, unproved
and unprovable, which guide modern science wherever it meets philosophical-religious
questions? That truly dogmatic rejection of everything
supernatural and transcendental, that obstinate ignoration of a
personal God, the rejection of any creative act, of any miracle, of any
revelation,&mdash;a presupposition directly raised to a scientific principle:
the principle of causality. Later on we shall make an excursion into
various fields of science, and we shall show clearly how this presumption
is stamped upon entire branches of science. Those solemn assurances
of persevering unselfishness in desiring nothing but the truth; the
confidence with which they claim a monopoly of the instinct for the
truth, all this will appear in quite a strange light, the twilight of dishonesty,
<pb n='130'/><anchor id='Pg130'/>
when we examine the documents and records of liberal science
itself. We shall see sufficiently how truthful the self-confession of
a modern champion of liberal science really is: <q>The recently coined
expression, <q>science unprepossessed,</q> I do not like, because it is a product
of that shortcoming which has already done so much damage to free
thought in its struggle with the powers of the past&mdash;because that word
is not entirely honest. None of us sits down to his work unprepossessed</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>F. Jodl</hi>, Neue Freie Presse, November 26, 1907). Here we
shall touch upon only one more question.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Duty to Believe and Scientific Demonstration.</head>

<p>
But cannot the believing Christian submit to scientific investigation
the doctrine of faith itself, which he must without
doubt hold to be true? This must surely be allowed if he is
to convince himself scientifically of the truth of it. Indeed,
this is allowed. He may critically examine everything to the
very bottom, even the existence of God, the rationality of his
own mind. But how can he, if no doubt is permissible? To examine
means to search doubtingly; it means to call the matter
in question&mdash;this, too, is right. It is, on the one hand, a doctrine
of the Catholic Church that they who have received faith
through the ministry of the Church, that is, they that have been
made familiar with the essential subjects of the faith and the
motives of their credibility by proper religious instruction, must
not doubt their faith. They have no reasonable excuse for
doubting because they are assured of the truth of the faith.
We have discussed this point before.<note place='foot'><q>They that have received the faith through the ministry of the
Church can never have just cause for changing their faith or calling it
into doubt</q> (Sess. III, ch. 3). The Vatican Council did not thereby
mean to say that an exceptional case could not happen where some one,
without fault of his own, might fall away from his faith, either on account
of insufficient religious instruction, or of natural dullness or exceptional
misfortunes in the circumstances of life in which he may be placed.
The theologians who worded the decision also say that the Council did
not intend to condemn the opinion expressed by many older theologians,
that under certain conditions an uneducated Catholic might be led in
such way into error as to join another faith without committing a sin.
(cf. <hi rend='italic'>Granderath</hi>, Const. Dog. ss. oec. Concl. Vat. 69).</note>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As a matter of course only voluntary doubts are excluded, doubts by
which one assents deliberately and wilfully to the judgment that perhaps
not all may be true that is proposed for our belief. Involuntary
<pb n='131'/><anchor id='Pg131'/>
doubts are neither excluded nor sinful. These are apparent counter-arguments,
objections, difficulties against the faith, which occur to the
mind without getting its conscious approval. They are not unlikely,
because the cognition of the credibility of Christian truths, while it is
certain, is yet lacking in that obvious clearness which would render
obscurity and counter-argument impossible; the assent to faith is free.
Doubts of this kind are apt to molest the mind and buzz round it like
bothersome insects, but they are not sinful because they do not set aside
the assent to faith any more than the cloud that intervenes between
us and the sun can extinguish its light. The assent to faith is withdrawn
only when the will with clear consideration approves of the judgment
that the doubt may be right.
</p>

<p>
But what about doubts which one cannot solve? Would we not owe
it to truth and probity to withhold assent to faith for a while?
</p>

<p>
The answer lies in the distinction of a twofold solution of difficulties.
It is by no means necessary, nor even possible, to solve directly all
objections; it suffices to solve them indirectly, that is, by recognizing
them as void; since faith is certain, whatever is contrary to it must be
false. If one is convinced by clear proofs of the innocence of a defendant
he will not be swayed in his assurance, no matter how much circumstantial
evidence be offered against the defendant. He may not be able
to account directly for one or the other remarkable coincidence of circumstances,
but all the arguments of the other side are to him refuted,
because to him the defendant's innocence is a certainty. Thus the faithful
Christian may hear it solemnly proclaimed as a scientifically established
fact that miracles are impossible, because they would be tantamount
to God making correction on His own work, because they would
imply a self-contradiction, or they would be against the law of preservation
of energy; he hears of atrocities in the history of the Church,
of the Inquisition, of the Church being an enemy of civilization&mdash;he
knows not what to say: but one thing he knows, that there must be an
answer, because he knows, enlightened by faith, that his belief cannot be
false. Nowhere is it demanded that all objections be directly answered,
in order that the conviction be true. If I, with the whole world, am convinced
that I am able to recognize the truth, must I therefore carefully
disentangle all the cobwebs ever spun about the truth by brooding philosophical
brains? If I am in the house, safe from the rain, must I, in
order to keep dry, go out and catch every drop of rain that is falling?
Such doubts may indeed harass the untrained mind, may even confuse it.
This is the juncture where grace comes in, the pledge of which has been
received at baptism, bringing enlightenment, peace, assurance; then we
learn from others and from ourselves that faith is also a grace.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Nevertheless a scientific examination of the foundations and
truths of faith is allowed and wholesome. Nearly all the theological
works written by Catholics since the days of <hi rend='italic'>Justin</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi> are nothing but examinations of this kind. At every
examination one proceeds with doubt and question. This is
<pb n='132'/><anchor id='Pg132'/>
admitted; but this doubt must be merely a methodical one,
not a serious one, nor need it be serious. These two kinds
of doubt must be clearly distinguished. In case of a serious
doubt I look upon the matter as really dubious, and withhold
my assent. I am not yet convinced of its truth. This kind of
a doubt is not allowed in matters of faith and it is the only one
that is forbidden. In case of a methodical doubt I proceed as
convinced of a truth, but I do not yet see the reasons plainly,
and would like to be fully conscious of them. Evidently there
is no need of casting aside the convictions I have hitherto held,
and of beginning to think that the matter is by no means
positively established.
</p>

<p>
For instance, I am convinced that a complicated order must
be the work of intellect; however, I would like to find the
proof of it. Hence I proceed as if the truth were yet to be
found. But it would evidently be absurd to think in the meantime
that such admirable order could be the result of blind accident.
Or, I am convinced that there must be a source for
every event: I desire to find the demonstration of it. In the
meantime shall I think it possible for another Nova Persei to
be produced in the sky without any cause? Or, investigating to
see whether I am capable of recognizing the truth, shall I
seriously become a sceptic till I am convinced that I ought not
to be such? As soon as I really doubt that I can recognize anything
at all as true, obviously I cannot proceed any further.
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> begins his <q>Critique of Pure Reason</q> with this doubt,
and many imitate him, but only by evident inconsistency are they
able to continue their researches by means of reason. Scientific
examination does not consist in repudiating a certainty held hitherto,
in order to arrive at it anew; it consists in bringing to
one's clear consciousness the reasons for that certainty, and in
trying to formulate those reasons precisely. To investigate the
light it is evidently not necessary first to extinguish it.
</p>

<p>
Thus the believing Christian may most certainly probe into
his religious conviction without interfering with his adherence,
and by doing so proceed unprepossessed in the fullest sense,
for unprepossession does not mean the rooting up of all certainty.
At the threshold of wisdom does not sit Scepticism.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='133'/><anchor id='Pg133'/>

<div>
<head>What Unprepossession is Not.</head>

<p>
But the deeper, modern meaning of unprepossession is precisely
the right to doubt seriously everything, especially the
truths of the Christian faith; this is the freedom demanded.
Scepticism, the stamp of our time.
</p>

<p>
Many a misconception may have contributed to the definition
of this unprepossession. For instance, overlooking the
important difference between methodical doubt and serious
doubt.
</p>

<p>
Then there is the erroneous opinion that we should and
could proceed everywhere in the same way as in the natural
sciences. Almost parallel with the progress in the natural
sciences grew the doubt of the correctness of the ancient physical
and astronomical notion of the world; piece after piece
crumbled away under the hand of research; new truths were
discovered. In just admiration of these results it was concluded
that all provinces of human cognition should be <q>researched</q>
in the same way, not excepting religion and theories
of the world; here, too, science should cast a radical doubt upon
everything and discover truth&mdash;as if here we had to deal with
matters similar to astronomy and physics, in the state they
were centuries ago; as if all mankind was still ignorant of the
truth and science had to discover it.
</p>

<p>
This right to doubt is claimed especially in the higher
questions of religion. Certain cognition by reason is, after all,
impossible here, such is the presumption, and therefore, first
of all, it is the right and duty of man, as soon as he has
attained his intellectual maturity, to shape by doubt his views
of the world to the satisfaction of his mind and heart, to win
them by a struggle; nor is this true only in the case of the
single individual, but also of entire generations. To see problems
everywhere, not to have any convictions, this is taken
to be true unprepossession.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Man must learn,</q> so we are told, <q>that there is no absolute miracle,
not even in the domain of the religious life, which supernaturally offers
truth at a point or by an institution, but that every man and every era as
witnessed by the authority of history must conquer truth by themselves
<pb n='134'/><anchor id='Pg134'/>
for their own sake and at their own risk</q> (<hi rend='italic'>E. Troeltsch</hi>, Internationale
Wochensch. 1908, 26). Thus the mind of man cannot slake its thirst
for positive truth at the divine fountain of revelation, but only by search
and research. Such is the cheerful message of this science. <q>Amid grave
crises,</q> we are told again, <q>a new concept of science has forced its way
to the front since the beginning of the eighteenth century and conquered
the universities.</q> <q>Science is not a finished system, but a research
to be forever under examination</q> (<hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi>, Die Aufgabe der theol.
Facultaeten, 1901, 17).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Research without ever arriving at the sure possession of the
truth, this is now the meaning of science, especially of philosophy.
Hence there cannot be a philosophy conclusive and
immutable, and any point which seems established may at any
time be revised according to new perceptions. <q>There is no
question that may not be asked; none which in the abstract
could not just as well be denied as affirmed. In this sense philosophy
is unprepossessed</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, Die deutschen Universitaeten,
1902, 304 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). The highest achievement it declares
itself capable of, is not to point out the truth to its disciples,
for it does not know the truth itself, but only this: <q>We expect,
or at least we should expect, that during the years of study the
mind give itself earnestly to philosophy, and strive for a firm
grasp of ideas. The great pathfinders in world thought, <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, and whoever may be ranked with
them, remain the living teachers of philosophy.</q> Thus we
hold those great intellectual achievements, <hi rend='italic'>Plato's</hi> doctrine and
ideas, <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza's</hi> atheistic pantheism, <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle's</hi> objectivism and
<hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> subjectivism, with other views of the world of most
variegated patterns, all contradicting and excluding one another,
all dubious, none sure. What would be said of an
astronomy that could do nothing better than fix the telescope
on the different stars and then tell its disciples: Now look for
what you please, ideas of <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle's</hi>
theory of the spheres or <hi rend='italic'>Newton's</hi> theory of gravity; each has
its points, but of none can it be said it is certain! Such an
astronomy would probably be left to its deserved fate.
</p>

<p>
In the most important points of religion mankind has ever,
even in pagan times, recognized the truth, albeit imperfectly.
This is evinced by the conviction that there exists a personal
<pb n='135'/><anchor id='Pg135'/>
God and a hereafter; convictions which can be proved historically.
God's revelation has provided those who desire to believe
with a fuller knowledge of the truth: heaven and earth will
pass away, but these words will not pass away. But what is
already in our safe possession cannot be once more discovered by
research. What has already been found is no longer an object
of research. Mankind's lot would be a sad one indeed were
this unprepossessed science in the right; if in the most important
questions of life it were condemned forever to tantalizing
doubt. God's providence has ordained matters more
kindly for humanity.
</p>

<p>
On the other hand, it is a poor science that has nothing to offer
but an eternal query for the truth. A poor science, that with
self-consciousness promises enlightenment and what not, but
finally can give nothing but ceaseless doubt instead of truth,
tormenting darkness instead of cheerful light. Why, then, research
where nothing can be found? Why raise searching eyes
to the sky when the stars do not show themselves? What kind
of progress is this when science does nothing further than dig
forever at the foundation? The great <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> has long
also passed judgment on this kind of science: <q>Such doubting
is abhorred by the City of God as false wisdom, because
among the things which we grasp with our intellect and reason
there is a knowledge, limited, it is true, because the soul is
weighed down by a perishable body, as the Apostle says: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ex
parte scimus</foreign>&mdash;but which has full certainty</q> (De Civitate
Dei, XIX, 18).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>An Erroneous Supposition.</head>

<p>
The errors just dealt with, and the demand that scientific research
must doubt everything, is based on a supposition often
stated expressly as a principle, and which appears quite plausible
even to a mind not trained in philosophy. It says: There is
but one certainty, the scientific certainty; the certain possession
of the truth can be obtained only by scientific research.
To rid the world of error, we are told, <q>there is but one way,
viz., scientific work. Only science and scientific truth are able
to dispose of error</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Th. Lipps</hi>, Allgemeine Zeitung, Muenchen,
<pb n='136'/><anchor id='Pg136'/>
August 4, 1908). <q>Truth is scientific truth, based on criticism,
hence the religion of modern man must also rest on critical
truth.... There is no other authority but science</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Masaryk</hi>,
Kampf um die Religion, 13).
</p>

<p>
This sort of speech we hear from the college chair as the
slogan for education and enlightenment: any one deficient in
science or in education belongs more or less to the unthinking
mass who have no convictions of their own, but submit blindly
to impressions and authority.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Such unclarified conceptions, with their inferences, are even met with
where they would not be expected, for instance, we read: <q>What the
average individual needed was a good shepherd, a shepherd's devotion
and love, that uplifts and urges onward; it was authority, Church-ministry
and care of souls, that was needed. The Church is an organized
pastorate, for the average individual likes to go with the flock. The
chosen are they who feel within themselves the great question of
truth as the care of their heart and task of their life, who experience its
tremendous tension, and who are struggling to the end with the intellectual
battles provoked by this question of truth. The average people,
<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the many, the great majority, need something steady to which they
can cling&mdash;persons and teachers, laws and practice.</q> And why this
uncharitable distinction between people belonging to the flock and the
chosen ones, as if the Church and its ecclesiastical functions were only
appointed for the former? Particularly because <q>without methodical
scientific work man cannot attain to the truth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>H. Schell</hi>, Christus,
1900, 125, 64).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus science may summon everything before its forum, no
one having a right to interfere; in the superiority bestowed by
the right of autocracy it may sweep aside everything that is
opposed to it, no matter by what authority. Hence science must
be free to jolt everything, free to question the truth of everything,
which it has not itself examined and approved. This
is the fundamental supposition of modern freedom of science;
also a fatal error, betraying a woeful ignorance of the construction
of the human intellect, in spite of all its pretentiousness. As
a rule we have a true certainty in most matters, particularly in
philosophical-religious convictions, a certainty not gained by
scientific studies; by aid of the latter we may explain or
strengthen that certainty, but we are not free to upset it.
</p>

<p>
We cannot avoid examining this point a little closer. There
is a twofold certainty, one, which we shall call the <emph>natural</emph> certainty,
<pb n='137'/><anchor id='Pg137'/>
is a firm conviction based on positive knowledge, but
without a clear reflexive consciousness of the grounds on which
the conviction is actually resting. Reason recognizes these
grounds, but the recognition is not distinct enough for reason
to become conscious of them, to be able to state them accurately
and in scientific formulas. <emph>scientific</emph> certainty is a firm
conviction, with a clear consciousness of the grounds, hence
it can easily account for them. Natural certainty is the usual
one in human life; scientific certainty is the privilege of but a
few, and even they have it in but very few things.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Everybody has a positive intellectual certainty that a complicated
order cannot be the result of accident, and that for every event
there must be a cause, though not every one will be able readily to demonstrate
the truth of his certainty. But if the philosopher should look
for the proof, he would do so in no other way than by reflecting upon his
natural and direct knowledge, and by trying to become conscious of what
he has thus directly found out. To illustrate by a few examples: We
are all convinced of the existence of an exterior world, and any one who
is not an idealist will call this conviction a reasonable certainty, and
yet only a few will be able to answer the subtle questions of a sceptic.
This certainty again is a natural but not a scientific one. How difficult
it is here also for reason to attain scientific certainty, how easy it is to
go astray in these researches, is proved by the errors of idealism so incomprehensible
to the untrained natural mind. Let us ask, finally, any
one: Why must we say: <q><emph>Cæsar</emph> defeated <emph>Pompey</emph>,</q> but not <q><emph>Cæsar</emph> defeated
of <emph>Pompey</emph></q>? He will tell us this is nonsense; maybe he will
add that the genitive has another meaning. But should I ask further
how the meaning of the genitive differs from that of the accusative, as
both cases seem to have often the same meaning, I shall get no answer.
There is a certitude, but only a natural one. Even if I should ask modern
students of the psychology and history of languages, like <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Paul</hi>, or whatever their names may be, I should not get a satisfactory
answer either. The whole logic of language, with its subtle forms and
moods of expression&mdash;how difficult for scientific research! And yet the
mind of even a child penetrates it, and not only a European child, but
the Patagonian and negro child, who is able to master by its intellectual
power complex languages, with four numbers, many moods, fourteen
tenses, etc.
</p>

<p>
These examples will suffice, though volumes of them could be written.
They show us clearly a twofold certainty. The difference between
the natural and scientific certainty is not that the former is a blind conviction
formed at random, but only that one is not clearly conscious of
the reasons on which it rests, whereas this is the case in scientific certitude.
We see further the untrained power of the intellect manifest
itself in natural knowledge and certainty; for this purpose it is
primarily created; philosophical thought is difficult for it, and many
<pb n='138'/><anchor id='Pg138'/>
have no talent at all for it. It is also unfailing in apprehending directly
things pertaining to human life. Here the mind is free of that morbid
scepticism of which it too easily becomes a prey when it begins to
investigate and probe scientifically. What it there sees with certainty
cannot always be found here distinctly, and thus the mind begins to
doubt things it was hitherto sure of, and which often remain instinctively
certain to the mind despite its artificial doubts. Now we can also
understand why philosophers so often have doubts which to the untrained
look absurd, and why philosophers differ in their opinions on most
important things, whereas mankind guided by its natural certitude is
unanimous in them.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This certainty is destined to be the reliable guide of man
through life. It precedes science, and can even exist without
it. Long before there was a science of art and of jurisprudence
the Babylonians and Egyptians had built their monuments, and
<hi rend='italic'>Solon</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Lycurgus</hi> had given their wise laws. And long before
philosophers were disputing about the moral laws, men had the
right view in regard to virtue and vice (cf. <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, De Oratore, I,
32). The same certitude is also destined to guide man in the
more important questions, in the questions of religion and
morality. The Creator of human nature and its destiny, who
implanted instinct in the animal to guide it unconsciously in
the necessities of life, has also given to man the necessary light
to perceive with certainty truths without which it would be
impossible to live a life worthy of man.
</p>

<p>
It is just this natural knowledge and certitude that gives man
certainty of divine revelation, after God vouchsafed to give it
to mankind for its unfailing guidance and help. For revelation
was not only intended for theologians, Bible critics, philosophers,
and Church-historians, but for all. And God has taken care,
as He had to do, that man has ample evidence that God has
spoken, and that the Church is the authorized Guardian of
this revelation, even without critical research in history and
philosophy. We have elsewhere briefly stated this evidence in
the words of the Vatican Council.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This evidence is seen in the invincible stability of the Church and its
unity of faith, the incontestable miracles never ceasing within it, the
grand figures of its Saints and Martyrs, virtue in the various classes, a
virtue increasing in proportion to the influence the Church exerts, the
spectacle that everything truly noble is attracted by the Christian faith
and the contrary repulsed. In addition the intrinsic grandeur and harmony
<pb n='139'/><anchor id='Pg139'/>
of the truths of faith, above all the unique figure of Christ, with
His wonderful life and sufferings, also the calm and peace of mind
effected in the soul of the faithful by living and thinking in this
faith; all these tell him that here the spirit of God is breathing, the
spirit of truth. The natural light of his intellect, further illuminated
by grace, suffices to give him a true intellectual certainty of his
faith, based upon these motives and similar ones, even without scientific
studies. The calmness of the mind that holds fast to this faith,
the compunction and unrest which follow defection from the faith, both
so characteristic of Catholics, prove that their minds embrace the
truth in their faith.
</p>

<p>
Hence it betrays little philosophical knowledge of the peculiarity of
man's intellectual life, if infidelity approaches an inexperienced,
believing student, perhaps even an uneducated labourer, with the
express assurance that his faith hitherto has been but a blind belief,
an unintelligent following of the lead of a foreign authority, with the
distinct admonition to turn his back on the faith of his childhood.
</p>

<p>
What has been said above makes it clear why a Catholic is not permitted
to have a serious doubt about his faith under the pretext that
he ought first to form a certain conviction all for himself by scientific
investigation. He has it already, if we presuppose sufficient instruction
and normal conditions; he may raise his natural certitude to a scientific
one by study if he has the time and talent for it, but he must not
condition his assent upon the success of his scientific investigations. He
has certitude; he has no right to demand scientific knowledge as a necessary
condition, because it is not required for certitude, and also because
it lies altogether outside of the conditions of human life. It would
amount simply to shaking off the yoke of truth. The Church teaches as
follows: <q>If any one says that the condition of the faithful and of those
who have not yet come to the only true faith is equal, so that Catholics
can have a just cause for suspending their assent and calling in question
the faith which they have received by the ministry of the Church until
they have completed the scientific demonstration of the credibility and
truth of it, let him be anathema.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
How high this wisdom rises above the limited thought of a
science that imagines itself alone to be wise! Sad indeed would
be the lot of mankind could it attain to certain truth in the most
important questions of life only by lengthy scientific investigations.
The overwhelming majority of mankind would be forever
excluded from the certain knowledge that there is a God, an
eternity, liberty, that there are immutable moral laws and truths,
on the value of which depends the woe and weal of humanity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Behold the wisdom of the world that is put before us: <q>In order to
arrive at a definite conclusion by our own philosophical reasoning (on
the existence of God and the possibility of miracles) what a multitude
of things must be presupposed!</q> Thus we are informed in a philosophical
novel of modern times which aims at proving the incompatibility of
<pb n='140'/><anchor id='Pg140'/>
the Catholic duty to believe with the freedom of the intellect [Katholische
Studenten, by <hi rend='italic'>A. Friedwald</hi> (nom de plume). An explanation of
the ideas contained in it is given by the Academia 18, 1905-6, December
and March. The ideas found in the novel are also advanced by <hi rend='italic'>A. Messer</hi>,
Einführung in die Erkenntnistheorie, 1909, p. 158 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>]. And Prof.
<hi rend='italic'>Rhodius</hi>, who put the ideas of the novel in formulas, teaches: <q>The
question whether our knowledge could penetrate beyond what we know
by our experience and even our senses, is answered, as you know, in the
negative by a noted philosophical school. Hence, before attacking those
metaphysical questions regarding the existence of God and His relations
to the world, we must first try to have definite views as to the essence
of human knowledge, of its criterion, its scope, and of the degrees of its
certainty. But these preliminary questions of theoretic knowledge, how
difficult and perplexing they are! You probably have not the faintest
idea into what a mass of individual problems the main questions must
be dissected, nor what a multitude of heterogeneous views are struggling
here against one another</q> (p. 181).
</p>

<p>
Consider how shortsighted a wisdom is manifested by these words.
Is it seriously intended to summon the peasant from his plough, the
old grandmother from behind the stove, and lead them into the lecture
rooms of the university in order that they might there listen to lectures
on phenomenalism, and positivism, and realism, and criticism, until
their heads are swimming? Or else can they not hope to arrive at the
truth? Do they seriously think that the truth asked for by every man,
the truth in the most vital questions of mankind, is the exclusive privilege
of a few college professors? And how very few. More than
twenty-four hundred years have elapsed since the days of <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>,
and yet modern philosophy still stands before the first preliminary
question in all knowledge, whether a man can know what the eye does
not see. <q>Many views are at variance there.</q> If this be the only way
for mankind to reach certain truth, then we are indeed in a pitiful
plight!
</p>

<p>
We esteem philosophy and its subtle questions, and we heartily wish
our Catholic young men in college to obtain a more thorough philosophical
training. But if, involved in theories, one will lose his
insight into the world and human life to such a degree as to make of
the <q>wisdom of the world</q> an isolated narrow speculation which boasts
of being alone able to discover the higher truths, while withering in
neurasthenic doubt&mdash;such wisdom should be left to its deserved fate,
sterility.
</p>

<p>
Or should it be possible to the ideal of Protestantism&mdash;and therefore
also of the modern spirit&mdash;to console mankind by pointing out that
the knowledge of the question which concerns us most deeply, <q>the
knowledge of God and the knowledge of good, remains but a leading
idea and problem, though we are confident of advancing nearer to its
solution</q>? Is thus mankind to be eternally without light in the most
important questions and problems? Every little plant and animal is
equipped by nature with everything it needs&mdash;and man alone to be a
failure? The young shoots of the tree strive to bring forth blossoms
and fruit, and succeed; the bird flies off in the fall in quest of a new
home, and finds it; hunger and thirst demand food and get it; only the
<pb n='141'/><anchor id='Pg141'/>
aim of the human mind shall never be fulfilled&mdash;he alone shall ever
pine without hope!&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dicentes se esse sapientes stulti facti sunt.</foreign> What
a difference between such principles and the grand thoughts of Christianity!
A difference like that between peace and eternal restless doubt,
like that between man's dignity and man's degradation, between man's
short-sightedness and the wisdom of God.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Hence the result of our discussion is: independent of science
mankind has its positive convictions, independent of science
it finds here rest and gratification in its longing for truth.
Scientific study and research are for the purpose of setting
these truths in a brighter light, of defending the patrimony of
mankind. But the fosterer of science must not claim the freedom
to ignore these positive convictions in himself and in others,
to endanger the patrimony of mankind by doubts and attacks
instead of protecting it, much less must he condemn the human
mind to the eternal labour of <hi rend='italic'>Sisyphus</hi>, to the eternal rolling
of a huge stone which, recoiling, must always be lifted anew.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='142'/><anchor id='Pg142'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter IV. Accusations And Objections.</head>

<p>
Among the notable facts in history one stands out prominently,
it is more remarkable than any other, and evokes
serious thought. It is the fact that the Christian religion, especially
its foremost representative, the Catholic Church, concerning
which every unbiassed critic is bound to admit that none
has made more nations moral, happy and great than this
Church; that nowhere else has virtue and holiness flourished
more than in her; that no one else has laboured more for truth
and purity of morals; that nevertheless there is not, and
never was, an institution which has more enemies, which has
been more persecuted, than the Catholic Church. This fact will
suggest to every serious-minded critic the question, whether we
have not here focussed that tremendous struggle, which truth
and justice have ever waged in the bosom of mankind against
error and passions&mdash;an image of the struggle raging in every
human breast. The Church recognizes in this fact the fulfilment
of the prophecy of her Founder: <q>And ye shall be hated by all
men for my name's sake</q> (Luke xxi. 17). And the Church may
add, that in her alone this prophecy is being fulfilled.
</p>

<div>
<head>The Enemy of Progress.</head>

<p>
In her journey through the centuries the Church has had to
listen to many accusations because she, the keeper of the truth
entrusted to her care, has refused to respond to the demand to
accept unconditionally the ideals devised by existing fashions.
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Cantavimus vobis et non saltastis</foreign> (we have piped to you and
you have not danced). Therefore the Church has been called
reactionary; the heretics of the first centuries of Christianity
denounced her as the enemy of the higher gnosis; a later period
<pb n='143'/><anchor id='Pg143'/>
denounced her as an enemy of the genuine humanism, in the
eighteenth century she was denounced as the enemy of enlightenment,
to-day she is denounced as the enemy of progress. Again
the Church is accused before the judicial bar of the children of
the age. They desire to eat plentifully from the tree of knowledge,
but the Church, they say, prevents them. They wish to
climb the heights of human perfection, to ascend higher than any
preceding generation, but the Church holds them back. She
will keep them in the fetters of her guardianship. And with
a keen, searching eye the smart children of our age have looked
the old Church over, taking notice of everything, anxious to put
her in the wrong.
</p>

<p>
Their charges do not fail to make an impression, even on the
Church herself. She wishes to justify herself before the plaintiffs,
and still more before her own children who trust in her.
Thus she has not hesitated in declaring loudly on most solemn
occasions that <emph>she is not an enemy of noble science</emph> and of
human progress, and with great earnest she takes exception to
this charge.
</p>

<p>
No wonder, one might say, that the Church makes such assurances.
It is time for her to realize that unless she can clear
herself from it this accusation will be her moral ruin at a time
when the banner of progress is held aloft, and when even the
Catholic world shares in that progress. True, but let us not
forget this: if there is anything characteristic of the Catholic
Church it is her frankness and honesty. She is not afraid to
proclaim her doctrines and judgments before the whole world;
she leaves her Index and Syllabus open for inspection, openly
avowing that she is the irreconcilable enemy of that emancipated
freedom proclaimed by modern liberalism as the ideal of the age.
It is the honesty which she inherited from her Founder, who told
the truth to friend and enemy, to His disciples and to the
Scribes, to <hi rend='italic'>Nicodemus</hi>, that lonely night, and to <hi rend='italic'>Caiaphas</hi>. With
the same straightforwardness the Church declares that she
feels not enmity but sympathy toward civilization. A fair-minded
critic will admit here again that the Church is in
earnest. <q>Far from opposing the fostering of human arts and
sciences, the Church is supporting and promoting them in
<pb n='144'/><anchor id='Pg144'/>
various ways,</q> declares the Vatican Council. <q>The Church does
not underrate nor despise their advantages for human life: on
the contrary, it avows that they, coming as they do from God,
the Master of the sciences, also lead to God by aid of His grace,
when properly used</q> (Sess. III, c. 4). The Church has put
this accusation on the list of errors of the age condemned by
<hi rend='italic'>Pius X.</hi> (Sent. 57). She feels the charge as an injury.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Testimony of History.</head>

<p>
Nevertheless, in anti-ecclesiastical circles it is taken very often
for an established fact that the Roman Church has ever tried
her best to hamper the progress of science, or has suppressed it,
or at least scowled at it. How could it be otherwise? they say.
How could she favour the progress made in enlightening reason
or in advancing human knowledge? Must she not fear for its
intellectual sway over men whom she keeps under the yoke of
faith? Must she not fear that they might awaken from the
slumber in which they were held prisoners by the suggestive
force of her authority, held to be transcendental; that they
might awaken to find out the truth for themselves? And what is
the use of science? He that believes will be saved: hence faith
suffices. If we wish to hear the accusation in the language of
militant science, here it is: <q>Outside the monastic institutions
no attempt at intellectual advancement was made (in the
Middle Ages), indeed, so far as the laity were concerned, the
influence of the Church was directed to an opposite result,
for the maxim universally received was, that <q>ignorance is the
mother of devotion</q></q> (<hi rend='italic'>J. W. Draper</hi>, History of the Conflict
between Religion and Science).
</p>

<p>
This is the train of thought and the result of anti-ecclesiastical
a-priorism and its historical research. Are the plain facts of
history in accord with it? The first and immediate task of
the Church is certainly not to disseminate science: her task,
first of all, lies in the province of morals and religion. But
as she is the highest power of morality and religion, she stands
in the midst of mankind's intellectual life, and cannot but come
in contact with its other endeavours, owing to the close unity
<pb n='145'/><anchor id='Pg145'/>
of that life. Hence, let us ask history, not about everything
it might tell us in this respect, but about one thing only.
</p>

<p>
We do not wish to show how the Church, headed by the
Papacy, has become the mother of Western civilization and
culture. Nor shall we enumerate the merits of the Church
in art, nor point out the alertness she has certainly shown,
in her walk through the centuries, by taking up the intellectual
achievements of the time and assimilating them with her moral
and religious treasure of faith, withal preserved unchanged. The
old Church had done this with the treasures of ancient learning
and science; <q>this spirit of Christianity proved itself by the
facility with which Christian thinkers gathered the truth contained
in the systems of old philosophy, and, even before
that, by assimilating those old truths into Christian thought, the
beginning of which had already been made in the New Testament.
They were appropriated, without hesitating experiment,
without wavering, and were given their place in a higher order</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>O. Willmann</hi>, Gesch. des Idealismus, 2d ed., II, 1907, 67).
This, she unceasingly continues to do, as proved by the high
standard of Catholic life and Catholic science at the present, a
fact not even disputed by opponents. We point only incidentally
to <emph>the foundation and the fostering of primary schools</emph>
by the Church. It is an historical fact that public education
began to thrive only with the freer unfolding of the Church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The first elementary schools were those of the monasteries. Later
on there were established after their pattern the cathedral and chapter
schools, then the parish schools. Still later there came the town and
village schools&mdash;all of ecclesiastical origin, or at least under the
direction of the Church and in close connection with her. As early
as 774 we find an ecclesiastical school law, to the effect that each
Bishop should found an ecclesiastical school in his episcopal town and
appoint a competent teacher to instruct <q>according to the tradition
of the Romans.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Eugene II.</hi> ordained in 826 anew that efficient
teachers should be provided for the cathedral schools wherever needed,
who were <q>to lecture on the sciences and the liberal arts with zeal.</q>
<q>All Bishops should have the liberal arts taught at their churches,</q>
was a resolution of the Council held in Rome in 1079 by <hi rend='italic'>Gregory VII.</hi>
We read in the acts of the Lateran Synod of 1179: <q>Inasmuch as it
behooves the Church, like a loving mother, to see to it that poor children
who cannot count upon the support of their parents should not
lack opportunity of learning to read and make progress, there should
at every cathedral church be given an adequate prebend to the teacher&mdash;who
<pb n='146'/><anchor id='Pg146'/>
is to teach the clerics of this church and the poor pupils
gratuitously</q> (<hi rend='italic'>E. Michael</hi>, Gesch. des Deutschen Volkes II, 1899, 370).
School education flourished more and more; in the thirteenth century
it was in full bloom. In Germany even many unimportant places,
market towns, boroughs, and villages had their schools at that time. In
Mayence and its immediate neighbourhood there were, in the twelfth
and thirteenth centuries, seven chapter schools; at Muenster at least
four schools; the clerical schools at Erfurt had an attendance of no
less than 1,000 pupils. About the year 1400 the diocese of Prague alone
had 460 schools. In the middle Rhine district, about the year 1500,
many counties had an elementary school for every radius of two leagues;
even rural communities with 500 to 600 inhabitants, like Weisenau near
Mainz, and Michaelstadt in Odenwald, did not lack schools. (<hi rend='italic'>J.
Janssen</hi>, Gesch. des Deutschen Volkes, 15th ed., 1890, 26; cf. Michael,
1. c. 402, 417-419; <hi rend='italic'>Palacky</hi>, Gesch. v. Boehmen, III, 1, p. 186).
Even in far-off Transylvania there was, as early as the fourteenth century,
no village without a church and a school (<hi rend='italic'>K. Th. Becker</hi>, Die
Volksschule der Siebenbuerger Sachsen, 1894, y; Michael, 430). There
is no doubt that this flourishing state of schools was due in the first
place to the stimulus, support, and unselfish effort of the Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But we will not dwell longer on this subject. We wish, however,
to point out more plainly something more closely related
to our subject, viz., <emph>the attitude of the Church towards
the universities</emph>, at a time when the most prominent nurseries
of science were first coming into existence and beginning
to flourish, when they began to exert their influence upon
the civilization of Europe. Here, in the first place, it should
become clear whether it be true that the Church has ever looked
upon the progress of science with suspicion or even suppressed
it. History teaches, in this instance again, that no one has
shown more interest, more devotion, more readiness, to make
sacrifices in promoting the establishment and growth of the
university, than the Church.
</p>

<p>
When, in the twelfth and thirteenth centuries, the thirst for
knowledge, stronger than at any time in history, made itself
felt in the Christian countries of Europe, there were erected in
the universities great international homes of science, so as to
gratify the deeply felt need of education. And thousands
hastened to these places to acquire the knowledge of the
period, overcoming all difficulties, then much greater than
now. A recent writer remarks about this not without reason:
<q>The academic instruction met on part of the thronging
<pb n='147'/><anchor id='Pg147'/>
thousands with a psychic disposition more favourable than at
any other time. In a way it was here a case of first love</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>W. Muench</hi>, Zukunftspaedagogik, 1908, 337). At the universities
of the Middle Ages there were taught theology, ecclesiastical
and civil law, the liberal arts, and medicine. But not in the
manner that all four faculties were everywhere represented.
Theology especially was quite frequently lacking, though the
aim was to have all sciences represented. What since the beginning
of the thirteenth century was first of all understood by
a university were <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>studia generalia</foreign>&mdash;then the usual name for
universities, in contradistinction to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>studium particulare</foreign>. Universities
enjoyed the privilege of having their academic degrees
honoured everywhere, and their graduates could teach anywhere.
The universities were of an international character. Hence it
happened that at the German universities there were sitting in
quest of knowledge by the side of Germans also foreign youths,
from Scotland, Sweden, and Norway, from Italy and France,
all contending for academic honours&mdash;a moment which unquestionably
contributed in no small degree to the improvement
of education.
</p>

<p>
Prior to the Reformation, universities were not state institutions,
as they are at present in Europe, but free, independent
corporations. They were complete in themselves, they made
their own statutes, had their own jurisdiction, and many other
privileges. The modern university enjoys but a small remnant
of those ancient prerogatives. In a public speech, made in the
presence of the Duke of Saxony, the Leipsic professor, <hi rend='italic'>Johann
Kone</hi>, could say in 1445: <q>No king, no chancellor, has any
right to interfere with our privileges and exemptions; the university
rules itself, and changes and improves its statutes according
to its needs</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>, 1. c. 91).
</p>

<p>
Up to the year 1300 there were no less than 23 universities
established in Italy, 5 in France, 2 in England, 4 in Spain, and
1 in Portugal. <q>Had all intentions been realized, Europe would
have had by the year 1400 no fewer than 55 universities, including
Paris and Bologna. But of 9 of them there are extant only
the charter deeds that were never executed. At any rate, there
were 46 of them, of which 37 or 39 existed at the turn of
<pb n='148'/><anchor id='Pg148'/>
the fourteenth century; a considerable number, which was not
known till recent years</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>). Germany, Austria, and
Hungary shared in 8: Prague, Cracow, Vienna, Fuenfkirchen,
Ofen, Heidelberg, Cologne, and Erfurt. Within fifty years, from
1460 to 1510, no less than 9 universities were founded in Germany&mdash;a
clear proof of the generous enthusiasm for science
of that period.
</p>

<p>
By their fostering and founding of universities, secular
princes have won the lasting gratitude of posterity, and so have
the municipalities of a later period for showing an even greater
zeal than those princes. But it was indisputably the Church that
bestowed upon these homes of learning and culture the greatest
benevolence and support for their foundation and maintenance.
</p>

<p>
In the first place, history shows that the majority of them
were founded by <emph>Papal charters</emph>. Since universities were
understood to have the power of conferring degrees of international
value, they had to be universally acknowledged; this could
be effected only by an authority of universal recognition; hence
by the Roman-German Emperor&mdash;as the supreme prince of the
world-wide Christian monarchy, or by the Pope, who was considered
in the first place. He was the general Father and
Teacher of Christendom; this is why Papal charters were so
zealously sought after, in addition to imperial charters. Of
the 44 universities called into existence before the year 1400,
31 were founded by Papal charters. A similar condition prevailed
in the fifteenth century and afterwards, up to the Reformation.
This was no interference in foreign affairs: such an
interpretation would have caused just surprise in the Middle
Ages. That the highest spiritual power on earth should have
the first claim in education was a matter of general concession.
And certainly the manner in which the Church made
use of this right, to speak with an historian of the universities,
forms <q>one of the most important, and by no means least inglorious,
parts of an activity so manifold and difficult</q> (<hi rend='italic'>V. A.
Huber</hi>, Die Englischen Universitaeten, I, 1839, p. 14).
</p>

<p>
These Papal charters breathe a warm <emph>benevolence</emph> for
science. Everywhere we find the wish expressed, that studies
thrive in those places which are most suitable for the effectual
<pb n='149'/><anchor id='Pg149'/>
spread of science, and that the different countries have a sufficient
number of scientifically trained men.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Read, for instance, the charter given by Pope <hi rend='italic'>Boniface VIII.</hi> to
Pamiers and Avignon, or the Letter of Privileges granted to Coimbra by
<hi rend='italic'>Clement V.</hi> (apud <hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 793, 524), or <hi rend='italic'>Pius II.'s</hi> Bull founding the
university of Basle. The Pope says here about the aim of science:
<q>Among the various blessings to which man may by the grace of God
attain in this mortal life, the last place is not to be given to persevering
study, by which man may gain the pearl of the sciences, which
point out the way to a good and happy life, and by their excellence
elevate the learned men above the uneducated. Science makes man
like to God, and enables him to clearly perceive the secrets of the
world. It aids the unlearned, it elevates to sublime heights those
born in the lowliest condition.</q> <q>For this reason the Holy See has
always promoted the sciences, given them homes, and provided for
their wants, that they might flourish, so that men, well directed, might
the more easily acquire so lofty a human happiness, and, when
acquired, share it with others.</q> This was the longing desire that
led to the opening at Basle of <q>a plentiful spring of science, of whose
fulness all those may draw who desire to be introduced into the study
of the mysteries of Scripture and learning.</q> Even prior to this, the
same Pope had written to the Duke <hi rend='italic'>Louis of Bavaria</hi>: <q>The Apostolic
See desires the widest possible extension of science,</q> which, <q>while
other things are exhausted by dissemination, is the only thing that
expands the more the greater the number of those reached by it</q>
(apud <hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>, 1. c, p. 89).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But the Church was not satisfied with granting charters.
She also gave very <emph>substantial material aid</emph> to most of the
universities. The Popes maintained two universities at Rome,
one of them connected with the Papal Curia, a sort of court-school.
It was founded by <hi rend='italic'>Innocent IV.</hi>, in order that the many
who came to the Papal court from all parts of Christendom might
satisfy also their thirst for knowledge. Theology, law, especially
civil law, medicine, and languages, including Oriental languages,
were taught there. Besides this there was another university at
Rome, founded by <hi rend='italic'>Boniface VIII.</hi> for a similar purpose: it did
not flourish long, though in 1514 it counted no less than eighty-eight
professors. Many attempts to found or support universities
would have proved abortive had not the Popes provided for
the salaries of professors by prebends and stipends, and by
allotting to that end a portion of the income of priests and
churches. Bishops, too, proved themselves zealous patrons of
<pb n='150'/><anchor id='Pg150'/>
the universities (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, Gesch. des gelehrten Unterrichts, 2d
ed., I, 1898, p. 27).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus, to cite a few examples of German universities, there was in
1532, with the consent of the Archbishop <hi rend='italic'>Arnest</hi>, a contribution raised
by the clergy for the endowment of the university of Prague, to which
the various cloisters and chapters, especially those at Prague, contributed.
With the money thus raised the Archbishop purchased property,
the income from which was to provide salaries for the professors.
Twelve professors received from <hi rend='italic'>Urban V.</hi> the canonicates of the
church of All Saints (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 598). Erfurt university was given 4
canonicates, Cologne 11, Greifswald still more. Similarly Tuebingen,
Breslau, Rostock, Wittenberg, and Freiburg were cared for (<hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi>,
Die Gesch. der Deutschen Universitaeten, II, 1896, p. 34, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
Vienna found a benefactor in the pastor of Gars, who on October
13, 1370, founded a purse for 3 sublectors and 1 scholar. Heidelberg
received 10 canonicates. Its great benefactor was the learned <hi rend='italic'>Johann
von Dalberg</hi>, first curator of the university, and later Bishop of
Worms. Under him Heidelberg reached the zenith of its lustre, and
laid the foundation of almost all that has won it the reputation it
at present enjoys. By his co-operation the first chair of Greek was
founded; to him the foundation of the college library is due, which
later on gained world-wide fame under the name of <q>Palatina.</q> He
further collected a private library, rich in Latin, Greek, and Hebrew
books, the use of which was open to all scientists. <q>The Rhenish Literary
Society</q> attained its greatest prominence under his direction
(<hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>, 1. c. 100-105). Ingolstadt, too, obtained its needed income
by the donation of rich church-prebends, to such an extent that the
<q>endowments netted the university about 2,500 florins,</q> a very large
sum for that time (<hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi>, 1. c. 38). <hi rend='italic'>Prantl</hi> also admits in regard
to Ingolstadt: <q>The Papal Curia did its best to furnish the university</q>
(Gesch. der Ludwig-Maximilian in Ingolstadt, 1872, I, 19, apud <hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>,
1. c. p. 9).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is true, the Church then owned much property. But it
is just as true that she was ever ready to support science and
colleges out of this property. Pope and clergy were also taking
incessant pains to make it possible for <emph>poor students</emph> to
attend the university, not only for theological students, but
for those of all the faculties, to give an opportunity to rich and
poor alike to enjoy the advantages of higher education. Stipends
and legacies of this kind are numerous. Even in our
own days many a son of an <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>alma mater</foreign> owes the stipend he
enjoys to endowments made by the Church. In the course
of time there were established at most of the universities so-called
<pb n='151'/><anchor id='Pg151'/>
<emph>colleges</emph> for the purpose of offering shelter and maintenance
to poor students.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
These colleges contributed essentially to the flourishing condition
of the university. Thus <hi rend='italic'>Albrecht v. Langenstein</hi> suggested, at the founding
of Vienna university, to the Duke, <hi rend='italic'>Albrecht of Austria</hi>, the establishment
of such colleges, inasmuch as the continuance of the university
was dependent on them, and stated that Paris owed its prosperity to
them (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 624).
</p>

<p>
The Popes set here the best example. <hi rend='italic'>Zoen</hi>, Bishop of Avignon, had
provided in his testament that eight students from the province of
Avignon should be maintained at Bologna by his successors from their
estates at Bologna. These estates, however, were sold later on. <hi rend='italic'>John
XXII.</hi> then interfered in favour of the students injured thereby and annulled
the deed of purchase. The income was set aside and increased to
an amount sufficient for thirty scholars; later on the Pope endeavoured
to raise their number to fifty. At the same celebrated academy, which,
next to Paris, had long been a beacon of science sought from near and
afar, <hi rend='italic'>Urban V.</hi> founded a home for poor students and directed the appropriation
of 4,000 gold ducats a year for it. From June 16, 1367, to June
15, 1368, the home received an appropriation of 5,908 ducats in gold and
155 baskets of cereals. His successor, <hi rend='italic'>Gregory XI.</hi>, set himself to the
task of completing the work begun. Out of the income of the Church
he ordered appropriated in the future 1,500 ducats a year for thirty
students, of whom one half were to study Canon Law, the other half
Civil Law. He then decreed the purchase of a home for 4,500 ducats
in gold, and ordered to pay out immediately 4,000 florins in gold for
the next school year. Besides the college named, <hi rend='italic'>Urban V.</hi> had founded
one at Montpellier for medical students, and another, which had its seat
at first at Trets, later at Monosque. During his pontificate this Pope
maintained no less than 1,000 students at various institutions. Toulouse
also had several colleges for poor students, founded by high princes
of the Church. In the year 1359 <hi rend='italic'>Innocent VI.</hi> devoted his own home
at Toulouse with all its possessions and its entire income to twenty
poor students, ten of whom were to study Canon Law and ten Civil
Law. For their further maintenance he ordered given to them, besides
other things, 25,000 florins in gold <q>manualiter</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 213 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>,
308 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>, 339).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Finally, nearly all universities, whether they owed their existence
to ecclesiastical or civil power, received many and far-reaching
<emph>privileges</emph> from the Popes. Not the least one was for
clerical students the dispensation to free them from the requirement
of residence for the enjoyment of their benefices,
which made it possible for them to study in remote university
towns, where they were free to study not only theology,
but other sciences as well. This dispensation was quite common.
<pb n='152'/><anchor id='Pg152'/>
Furthermore, the Popes protected in the most energetic way the
universities in their privileges and freedom every time they
were applied to for aid.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This happened, for instance, at Bologna. The students there had
their free guilds. The municipal authorities began to restrict
their privileges by forbidding native students under heavy penalties
to study outside of Bologna, which was later on extended to the
alien students. The professors sided with the city. <hi rend='italic'>Honorius III.</hi>
in 1220 called upon the latter to repeal those statutes; if they wanted
to confine the students to the city, it should be done by clemency,
not with severity and coercion. The city relented. But we see again
in 1224 the students appeal, for the third time since 1217, to the
Pope, begging for protection. The tension had grown; the city was
actually beginning to use force. <hi rend='italic'>Honorius</hi> sharply rebuked the city
for this action, threatening excommunication if the authorities continued
to suppress freedom. The city yielded completely, and the freedom
of the students was saved, thanks to their protector. Later on
the Popes had to interfere again. <hi rend='italic'>Clement V.</hi> had already ordered
the Bishops to protect the students at Bologna. His successor, <hi rend='italic'>John
XXII.</hi>, received complaints that privileges of students in Italy were
being violated by authorities and citizens of the city. Against the Podesta
of Bologna especially complaints were made. The Pope, in 1321
and 1322, bade the Bishops and Archbishops to take measures against
those who <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>directe et indirecte impedire dieuntur, ne ad praedictum
studium valeant declinare contra apostolica et imperialia privilegia</foreign>.
He appointed at Bologna a special protector and conservator of the
university. Some years after, when the Podesta declined to take the
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>juramentum de observandis statutis ejusdem studiis factis et faciendis</foreign>,
he was commanded to take the oath.
</p>

<p>
At Orleans there was a flourishing law school; especially its <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>jus
civile</foreign> was famous. Professors and students were granted by <hi rend='italic'>Clement
V.</hi> the privilege of an autonomous university with the right of free
corporation, with the power to suspend lectures in case they could get
no satisfaction for any wrong done them. These privileges were a thorn
in the eye of the city; its citizens even allowed violence to be done
the university. Then <hi rend='italic'>Philip the Fair</hi> interfered, but in a way which
indicates that he did not know sufficiently the university life of the
Middle Ages. Moreover, he annulled the granted free fellowship, and
put professors and the students under civil supervision. But this was
not tolerated in those days. The king had at the same time given
many privileges, but they were disregarded. In 1316 professors and
students left Orleans and the university ceased to exist. The first
act of <hi rend='italic'>John XXII.</hi> upon ascending the Papal throne was to restore
this school, the French king himself having begged his support in the
matter. The king's suggestion to take the privilege of free fellowship
from the professors and students was rejected by the Pope. The
Pope reaffirmed all privileges granted to the university, whereupon the
professors and students returned, to inaugurate the most brilliant epoch
of their college.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='153'/><anchor id='Pg153'/>

<p>
Considering these facts, one may subscribe to the judgment of
<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi> which he pronounces at the conclusion of his thorough
treatise on the universities of the Middle Ages: <q>So far as
the foundation of the universities can be spoken of, its merit
belongs to the Popes, to secular rulers, clergy, and laity.
But that the lion's share belongs to the Popes every one must
admit who has followed my presentment, which is exclusively
based on documents, and who examines history with impartiality</q>
(Ib. 792 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). Even <hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi>, who is very unfavourably
disposed towards the Church, cannot deny that <q>numerous
Popes have shown warm interest for the fostering of sciences
during those centuries, and were for the most part themselves
prominent representatives of science</q> (Ib. 403).
</p>

<p>
That the mediæval universities in some points, though not
in all, were inferior to modern universities, was not their
fault. No good judge of human conditions could expect it
to be otherwise. The experience and efficiency of the mature
man is not attained at once, but only after the exertions and
experiments made by him during the period of youth and
development. At a time when all the experiences in the field
of school legislation, which are the property of the present
day, had yet to be collected, when the relation between
lower and higher schools had not been regulated in all respects,
at that time it was not possible to be in the position
we are in to-day. Future critics of our times will see in our
present educational systems many gross defects, which often are
not hidden even to our own eyes. But it would be arrogance
for them to belittle our efforts, the fruits of which they will
once enjoy without any merit on their part. The university of
yore conformed to the educational purposes of that period; it
was the focus of intellectual life, perhaps to a larger degree than
is the case to-day. This suffices. Moreover, the number of professors
was quite considerable, that of the students even more so.
In Bologna in 1388 the number of professors was 70, not including
the theologians, among them 39 jurists; in Piacenza
there were from the years 1398 to 1402 71 professors; among
them were 27 teachers of Roman law and 22 teachers of medicine
(<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 209, 571).
</p>

<pb n='154'/><anchor id='Pg154'/>

<p>
In regard to the zeal displayed by the Church in promoting
universities, it might be objected that she was caring in the
first place for <emph>theology</emph>, not for the other sciences, and that
the universities then had chiefly been established for theological
students. This, however, is not the case. The universities especially
favoured by the Popes were first of all law schools,
chiefly of civil law, or medical schools. Those at Bologna,
Padua, Florence, and Orleans were principally law schools; in
Italy, in general, chief attention was paid to jurisprudence, particularly
to Roman law. Montpellier was essentially a medical
college; it attained during the thirteenth century preponderance
even over Salerno. The assertion has been made that the
vigorous life at this medical college was owing to its independence
of Rome (<hi rend='italic'>Haeser</hi>, Lehrbuch der Geschichte der Medizin,
1, 655. Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 342). But <hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi> has proved that <q>clerical
organs have been the moving spirits of the medical college
at Montpellier.</q>
</p>

<p>
Nor did the Papal charter deeds exclude any profane science.
The common formula, which always prevails, authorizes to teach
indiscriminately <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>in jure canonico et civili necnon in medicina
et qualibet alia licita facultate</foreign>. Only one science was frequently
excepted, and that was just theology. Of the forty-six
high schools that had been established up to the year 1400,
about twenty-eight, therefore nearly two-thirds, excluded by their
charter the teaching of theology. At first a number of universities
sprang up merely as law schools, others as medical
schools, and there was then no need to include the science
of theology in the schedule of studies. Furthermore, Paris
was ever since the twelfth century looked upon as the home and
the natural place for theology (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 703 f.). Hence the
benevolence of the Church towards the universities was not
merely determined by selfish interest.
</p>

<p>
Or was it, nevertheless? May the Church not have bestowed
so much care on the homes of science in order to increase her own
influence thereby, and also with an eye to the future? This
assertion has been made. But this assertion is an injustice and
it is against the testimony of history. The Popes very often
issued their charter deeds only then, when request was made
<pb n='155'/><anchor id='Pg155'/>
by worldly rulers and by the cities themselves. Hence there
was no hurried self-assertion. And the Church has never denied
the right to worldly powers to found their own high schools.
The theologians of the thirteenth century expressedly declared
it to be the duty of princes to provide for institutions of learning
(Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Thomas of Aquin</hi>, De regimine principum, I, 13; Op.
contra impug. relig. 3).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus up to the year 1400 nine high schools had received no charters
at all, ten only imperial charters or charters from their local sovereigns.
If the Popes had cared only about their influence, why then did they
treat such colleges with the same benevolence? Spain's first college
was founded at Paleneia in the years 1212-1214 by <hi rend='italic'>Alfonso VIII.</hi>
without asking the Pope. When soon afterwards it was in trouble
it was <hi rend='italic'>Honorius III.</hi> who aided <hi rend='italic'>Alfonso's</hi> successor in restoring it,
by assigning some ecclesiastical income to its professors. When
the college was nearly wrecked and Rome once more applied to for help,
<hi rend='italic'>Urban IV.</hi> lent an aiding hand because he did not want <hi rend='italic'>ut lucerna
tanta claritatis in commune mutorum dispendium sic extincta remaneat</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi> had founded a university of his own. When
it failed it was <hi rend='italic'>Clement IV.</hi> who urged <hi rend='italic'>King Charles</hi> of Anjou to re-establish
it. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>In eodem regno facias et jubeas hujusmodi studium
reformari</foreign> (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, 478, 459). This is not the language and action
of one who is only ruled by the passion to spread his own influence, and
not guided by benevolence for science.
</p>

<p>
But it is true, in supporting the higher schools the Church did
not aim at science as its ultimate object; it was her view that science
should serve the material welfare of man, but still more the highest
ethical and religious purpose of life. This in general was the conception
of the entire Middle Ages. At that time it would have been considered
curious to seek a science ultimately for its own sake.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
And the universities repaid the Church by gratitude and devotion.
The effort has been made to demonstrate that the
modern separation of science from religion had already begun
in the Middle Ages, and had showed itself everywhere; this
tendency for autonomy <q>appeared at first only timidly and in
manifold disguises</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi>, 14). How easy it is to find
such disguises may be shown by an example. The university
of Paris had after the death of <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi> asked for his remains.
<hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi> holds that the notion of the autonomy
of science had found sharp expression in the memorandum
wherein the university stated the motive of its request.
Now how does this harmless document sound? <q>Quoniam
<pb n='156'/><anchor id='Pg156'/>
omnino est indecens et indignum ut alia ratio aut locus quam
omnium studiorum nobilissima Parisiensis civitas quae ipsum
prius educavit nutrivit et fovit et post modum ad eodem doctrinae
monumenta et ineffabilia fomenta suscepit ossa ...
habeat.... Si enim Ecclesia merito ossa et reliquias Sanctorum
honorat nobis non sine causa videtur honestum et sanctum tanti
doctoris corpus in perpetuum penes nos habere in honore.</q> Evidently
the university requests the relic for itself, or rather for
the Parisiensis civitas, not in opposition to the Church, but in
opposition to other cities, altera natio aut locus. I wonder if
the Parisian admirers of St. Thomas ever dreamed that they
would one day be put in the light of forerunners of liberal
science, because of their pious application for the bones of their
great teacher? This is tantamount to carrying one's own idea
into the fact. <hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, probably the most competent judge
of the affairs of mediæval universities, writes as follows: <q>If
we weigh the different acts which suggest themselves to us in
these various foundations, and if we compare them with one another,
there is revealed to us, in the realm of history of the
foundation of mediæval universities, a wonderful harmony between
Church and State, between the spiritual and material.
This is the reason why the universities of the Middle Ages
appear to us as the highest civil as well as the highest ecclesiastical
teaching institutions. Fundamentally, they are the
product of the Christian spirit which penetrated the whole,
wherein Pope and Prince, clergy and laity, each held the proper
position</q> (l. c. p. 795).
</p>

<p>
One consequence of this relation between the universities and
the Church was that <q>they attained their greatest prosperity as
long as the unity of Church and faith remained unimpaired, and
that, at the time of the Reformation, they all sided with the
Church with the exception of two, Wittenberg and Erfurt. Torn
away from their ecclesiastical and established basis only by
violent means, they were led to the new doctrine, but really succumbed
to it only when their freedom had been curtailed and
they had been reduced to state institutions</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>, l. c. p. 91).
They had been, as the learned <hi rend='italic'>Wimpheling</hi> wrote at the
close of the sixteenth century, <q>the most favoured daughters
<pb n='157'/><anchor id='Pg157'/>
of the Church, who tried to repay by fidelity and attachment
what they owed to their Mother</q> (De arte impressoria, apud
<hi rend='italic'>Janssen</hi>, l. c. 91).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>A False Progress.</head>

<p>
Hence history cannot subscribe to the accusation that the
Church is the enemy of progress. How then does it happen that
this accusation is made so frequently? The idea suggests itself
that there may be here a different meaning given to the word
<q>progress,</q> that the Church opposes a certain kind of progress
which her enemies call <q>the</q> progress. And this is the actual
fact. If we examine the proofs which are to show the hostile
attitude of the Church, we meet at every step <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, the Copernican
system, the Syllabus, and Index. But this appears only on
the surface, which hides beneath it something that is easily overlooked
by the cursory glance. And this is the precise definition
of scientific and civilized progress. Progress has ever been
an ideal of powerful attraction. The noblest and best of men
have ever displayed the most earnest endeavour onward and
upward. In our times, however, this ideal comes forward differently
garbed, in the name of the new view of the world, and
resolutely censures as reactionary everything that will oppose it.
What is this definition?
</p>

<p>
Since the <emph>theory of evolution</emph> of <hi rend='italic'>Lamarck</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>
entered biology, it has also more and more invaded other branches
of science. The principle is now that everywhere, in the organic
or inorganic world and in the whole province of human life
there is a gradual growth and change&mdash;nothing permanent,
nothing definite and absolute. Uninterrupted evolution hitherto;
hereafter restless development; especially in the greatest
good belonging to human life, thought, philosophy, and
chiefly religion. Here, too, there are no forms nor dogmas
which evolution in its continual development does not evolve
and elevate. This idea of evolution is supplemented by subjectivism
with its <emph>relativism of truth</emph>: all views, especially
philosophical and religious <q>Truths,</q> are no longer the reproduction
of objectively existing things, but a creation of the
<pb n='158'/><anchor id='Pg158'/>
subject, of his inner experience and feeling; hence each age
must proceed to new thought of <emph>its own</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The methods of scientific research,</q> we are told, <q>are determined
by the idea of evolution, and this applies not only to natural sciences
but also to the so-called intellectual sciences,&mdash;history, philology,
philosophy, and theology. The idea of evolution influences and dominates
all our thoughts; without it progress in the field of scientific
knowledge is quite impossible.</q> We read, for instance, in the modern
history of philosophy: <q>The rise and fall of a system is a necessary
part of universal history; it is conditioned by the character of its
time, the system being the understanding of that time, while this
understanding of the time is conditioned by the fact that the time
has changed.</q> At <hi rend='italic'>Roscellin's</hi> time the nominalists were intellectually
inferior; but where there is question of undermining the militant
Church of the Middle Ages the nominalists will be considered to have
been the greater philosophers. In this the realists <q>by the futility
of their struggle proved that the time for nominalism had arrived,
hence that whoever favours it understands the time better; that is,
more philosophically. After the beginning of the Renaissance we
notice an attempt at philosophizing in such a way as to ignore the
existence of divine wisdom taught by Christianity. The pre-Christian
sages had done so: to philosophize in their spirit was therefore the
task of the time, and those who had a better understanding of the
time philosophized that way better than by the scholastic method;
though their method may appear reactionary to unphilosophical
minds</q> (<hi rend='italic'>J. E. Erdmann</hi>, Grundriss der Gesch. der Philosophie, 3d
ed., I (1878), 4, 262, 434, 502). This is a frank denial of any truth
in philosophy: the more neological and modern a thing is, the more
truth there is in it! Realism was right in <hi rend='italic'>Roscellin's</hi> time, but a
later period had to sweep it away. The Christian religion was right for
the Middle Ages, but when the Greek authors began to be read again
it was no longer modern.
</p>

<p>
Apostasy from the faith is considered a mark of progress. <q>Italian
natural philosophy,</q> we are told, <q>reached its pinnacle with <hi rend='italic'>Bruno</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Campanella</hi>, of whom the former, though the older, appears to
be more progressive on account of his freer attitude towards the
Church</q> (<hi rend='italic'>R. Falkenburg</hi>, Gesch. der neueren Philosophie, 5th ed.
(1905), page 30, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). Hence evidently further development of Christianity,
too, is demanded. According to subjectivistic views it was
hitherto only an historical product of the human intellect: hence
<q>onward to new and higher forms corresponding to modern thought
and feeling, onward to a new Christianity without dogmas and authority!</q>
<q>Break up those old tablets,</q> spoke <hi rend='italic'>Zarathustra</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Such is progress in thought and science, for which the way
must be opened. That the immutable dogmas of Christianity,
that the task of the Catholic Church to preserve revelation intact,
are incompatible with it, that the Church appears reactionary,
<pb n='159'/><anchor id='Pg159'/>
and as an obstacle to this progress, is now self-evident. Here
we have the <emph>deeper contrast between progress, in the anti-Christian
sense, and the essence of Christianity</emph> in general,
and, especially, of the <emph>Catholic Church</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is frankly admitted that the issue is the struggle between the
two views of the world&mdash;between the Christian, conservative dogmatism
and the anti-dogmatic evolutionary philosophy</q> (Neue Freie
Presse, Jun. 7, 1908). Faith according to its very essence is immutable
and stationary, science is essentially progressive: they had therefore
to part in a manner which could not be kept a secret. <q>A divine
revelation must necessarily be intolerant of contradiction, it must
repudiate all improvement in itself</q> (<hi rend='italic'>J. Draper</hi>, History of the
Conflict between Religion and Science, VI). <q>The great opposition
between the rigid dogmatism of the Roman Catholic Church and the
ever progressing modern science cannot be removed</q> (Academicus, l. c.
362). So say the opponents of the Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
There is no error, says <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>, which does not contain
some truth, especially when it is able to rule the thought of
many. Hence its capacity to deceive. The same is true in the
present case.
</p>

<p>
There is evolution and progress in everything, or at least
there should be. The individual gradually develops from the
embryo into a perfect form, though it becomes nothing else than
what it had formerly been in its embryonic state. Mankind advances
rapidly in civilization; we no longer ride in the rumbling
stage-coach but in a comfortable express train, and the tallow
candle has been replaced by the electric light. Thus we demand
progress also in knowledge and science, and even in religion.
Many things that were obscure to older generations have become
clear to us; we have corrected many an error, made many discoveries
which were unknown to our ancestors. Many doctrines
of faith, also, appear to our eyes in sharper outlines than before;
of many we have a deeper understanding, discovered new relations,
meanings, and deductions. Thus there is progress and
development everywhere.
</p>

<p>
But it would be erroneous to conclude from all this that there
cannot be any stable truths and dogmas, that progress to new
and different views and doctrines is necessary. By the same
right we might conclude that the main principles of the
Copernican system cannot be immutable, because they would
<pb n='160'/><anchor id='Pg160'/>
hinder the progress of science. Progress certainly does not
consist in throwing away all certainty acquired, in order to begin
anew. Or does it really belong to progress in astronomy to
again give up <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, to go back to <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi> and let the
sun and all the stars revolve again around the earth? Does not
progress rather consist in our studying these astronomical results
more closely, in building up the details, and, first of all, in trying
to solve new problems?
</p>

<p>
The champion of the faith will reply: Just as established
results do not hinder the progress of science, just so do the
doctrines of faith not form an obstacle to progress and evolution.
The fixed doctrines of the faith themselves, in themselves
and in their application to the conditions of life, offer rich
material for the growth of religious knowledge. And there is
the immense field for progress in the profane sciences. If any
one should say that the believing scientist, who is bound by his
dogmas, can do nothing further but reiterate his old truths, one
might in turn argue: Then the astronomer bound by the fundamental
rules of the Copernican system could have only the
monotonous task of drawing over and over again the outlines of
his system, while the mathematician who holds the multiplication
table to be an unalienable possession would not be allowed to
do aught but to repeat the multiplication table.
</p>

<p>
Or the argument may be put thus: We have made great
progress in the material province of civilization, in science
and art; <q>can an old religion suffice under these new and improved
conditions, a religion which originated at an age when
these conditions did not exist? This contradiction is shocking....
Progress in culture demands progress in religion.... We
want a more perfect religion, a higher religion</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Masaryk</hi>, Im
Kampf um die Religion, 1904, 29). Note the logic of this
demonstration. We no longer light our rooms by the dim light
of a small oil lamp, we walk no longer at night through dark
narrow lanes, but through brightly illuminated avenues, does
it follow from this that it can no longer be true that Christ is
the Son of God, nor that He has worked miracles, or founded
a Church, and a new religion is therefore necessary? We have
made progress in our knowledge of history; we know a good
<pb n='161'/><anchor id='Pg161'/>
deal of Rome and Carthage, of the civilization of ancient
Egypt and of Greece, and of their mutual relations; we have
other fashions of life than our fathers had, we build and paint
differently&mdash;our political life, too, has grown more complicated;
does it follow from all this, that it cannot be true that we are
created by God, that we must believe a divine revelation,
hence a new religion is necessary? Progress and evolution to
consist in ever abandoning the old and advancing to new and
different views&mdash;this is <emph>absurd</emph>. Absurd, in the first place,
because it is no <emph>progress</emph> at all, but a retrogression, a hopeless
alternation of forwards and backwards. There can be no
progress if I am always withdrawing from my old position;
progress is possible only by retaining the basis established and
then advancing therefrom. And <emph>evolution</emph> is not a continuous
remodelling and shaping anew, but a continuance in growth.
Evolution means that the embryo unfolds, and by retaining
and perfecting the old matter gradually becomes a plant;
evolution is in the progress from bud to blossom; but not in
the changing mass of clouds, swept away to-day by the current
wind and replaced to-morrow by other clouds. An absurdity,
also, for the reason that it violates all laws of reason,
that once there was a revelation of God to be believed, but that
this is no longer true.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, the demand to follow always <q>the ideas of the
period</q> suggests the question: Who is to represent the period?
Who represented Greece, the sophists or <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>? Who was representative
of the first days of Christianity, the Roman emperors
or the martyrs? Will not the passage in <hi rend='italic'>Goethe's</hi> Faust
apply in most cases: <q>What they call the spirit of the times is
but their own mind wherein the times are reflected</q>? True, if
progress is taken to be the overstepping by human reason of the
eternal standards of immutable truth and the barriers of faith,
if it is to be the attempt at emancipation from God and religion,
then there is no more resolute foe of progress than the Christian
religion, than the Catholic Church. But this is not progress
but loss of the truth, not higher religion but apostasy, not development
of what is best in man, but retrogression to mental
disintegration by scepticism.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='162'/><anchor id='Pg162'/>

<div>
<head>The Syllabus.</head>

<p>
In the eyes of many it is especially the Syllabus of <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi>
by which the Catholic Church has erected a lasting monument to
its enmity to civilization. It is the Syllabus, we are told, in
which <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> has <q>ex cathedra condemned the freedom of
science</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. Kahl</hi>, Bekenntnissgebundenheit und Lehrfreiheit,
1897, 10); <q>in which modern culture and science is being
cursed</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Th. Fuchs</hi>, Neue Freie Presse, Nov. 25, 1907); in
which <q>the most general foundations of our political order, the
freedom of conscience, are rejected</q> (<hi rend='italic'>G. Kaufmann</hi>, Die Lehrfreiheit
an den deutschen Universitaeten, 1898, 34); <q>in which
it has simply anathematized the achievements of the modern
concept of right</q> (<hi rend='italic'>F. Jodl</hi>, Gedanken über Reformkatholizismus,
1902, 5); the Syllabus <q>strikes blows against the autonomy
of human development of culture, it is a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non possumus</foreign>, I cannot
make peace, I cannot compromise with what is termed progress,
liberalism, and civilization.</q> The Syllabus is a favorite stock
argument of professional free-thinkers and agitators, and the
one with which they like to open the discussion. For this reason
we must say a few words about it.
</p>

<p>
When a Syllabus is spoken of without any distinction, the
Syllabus of <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> is meant. It is a list of eighty condemned
propositions which this Pope sent on December 8,
1864, to all the Bishops of the world, together with the encyclical
letter <q>Quanta Cura.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> had, prior to this, and on
various occasions, denounced these propositions as false and to
be repudiated. They were now gathered together in the Syllabus.
They represent the <emph>program of modern liberalism</emph> in
the province of religion and in politics in relation to religion.
They are repudiated in the following order: Pantheism; liberal
freedom of thought and of conscience as a repudiation of the
duty to believe; religious freedom as a demand of emancipation
from faith and Church; religious indifferentism; the denial of
the Church and of her independence of the state; the omnipotence
of state power, especially in the province of thought. The
single propositions are not all designated as heretical, hence the
contrary is not always pronounced to be dogma; they are rejected
<pb n='163'/><anchor id='Pg163'/>
in general as <q>errors.</q> It is not necessary to discuss
here the question whether and to what extent the Syllabus is
an infallible decision. Suffice it to say it is binding for believing
Catholics.
</p>

<p>
Has the Catholic any reason to be ashamed of the Syllabus?
</p>

<p>
It was a resolute deed. A deed of that intrepidity and firm
consistency which has ever characterized the Catholic Church.
With her fearless love of truth the Church has in the Syllabus
solemnly condemned the errors of the modern rebellion against
the supernatural order, of the naturalization and declaration
of independence of the human life. For this reason the Syllabus
is called an attack upon modern culture, science, and education,
upon the foundations of the state. Is this true?
</p>

<p>
It is, and it is not. All that is good and Christian in modern
culture is not touched by the Syllabus; it strikes only at
what is anti-Christian in our times and in the leading ideas
of our times. It does not condemn freedom of science, but only
the liberal freedom which throws off the yoke of faith; it does
not repudiate freedom of religion and conscience, but the <emph>liberal</emph>
freedom which will not acknowledge a divine revelation
nor take the Church as a guide. Not the foundations of modern
states are attacked, but only the liberal ideas of emancipation
from religion, and of opposition to the Church. The Church
proclaims to the world only what has been known to all Christian
centuries, that, just as the single individual is bound to
have the Christian belief and must lead a Christian life, so are
nations and organized states; that the human creature is subject
to the law of Christ in all its relations. Nor does she contend
against genuine progress in science, education and in the material
domain, but merely against liberal progress towards the
irreligious materialization of life.
</p>

<p>
This emancipation from the Christian faith poses mostly
under the attractive and deceptive name of <q>modern progress.</q>
Indeed, it has ever been the pretension of liberalism
to look upon itself as the sole harbinger of civilization, to claim
the guidance of intellectual life for its aim, and to stigmatize
as a foe of culture any one that opposes the dissemination of
its anti-Christian humanism. It is also an expert in giving
<pb n='164'/><anchor id='Pg164'/>
to words a charm and an ambiguous meaning that deceive.
Emancipation from religion is <q>progress</q> and <q>enlightenment.</q>
Everything else is reactionary. Its infidelity is freedom
of conscience and thought. Everything else is <q>bondage.</q> Only
its secular schools, its civil marriage, its separation of Church
and State are <q>modern.</q> Everything else is obsolete, hence no
longer warranted. For the Church to defend her rights is arrogance;
when the Church uses her God-given authority for the
good of the faith, she practises intellectual oppression; the
Catholic who lets himself be guided by his Church is called
unpatriotic, bereft of his civil spirit.
</p>

<p>
What striking contrast to the honesty in which the Church
presents her doctrines frankly before the whole world, without
disguise or artifice. The reason is that she has sufficient interior
strength and truth to render it unnecessary for her to take
refuge in disguise or present the truth in ambiguity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The clearest evidence of the Church's hostility to culture is the
condemnation of the 80th thesis of the <emph>Syllabus</emph>, so it is said. It is
the thesis that the Pope can and must reconcile himself to, and compromise
with, progress, liberalism, and modern civilization. This
is a condemned proposition, hence the contrary is true: the Pope of
Rome cannot, and must not, reconcile himself, nor compromise with,
liberalism and modern civilization. Here we have the frankly admitted
hostility against progress, education, and science&mdash;it is the
watchword of the Papacy.
</p>

<p>
This conclusion can be arrived at only by pushing aside all rules
of scientific interpretation. What progress is this, with what civilization
can the Papacy not be reconciled? The progress of modern
liberalism. The heading of the paragraph containing this proposition
states expressly that <q>errors of modern liberalism</q> are to be condemned.
This becomes clear by the Allocution <q>Jamdudum cernimus</q>
of March 18, 1861, from which this condemnation is taken. There
it is stated: <q>It is asked that the Pope of Rome reconcile himself with
progress, to liberalism as they call it, to the new civilization, and
compromise with them.... But now we ask of those inviting us to
be reconciled with modern civilization, whether the facts be such as
to tempt the Vicar of Christ on earth ... to connect himself with
the civilization of to-day without the greatest injury to this conscience
... a civilization that has caused the dissemination of numerous
despicable opinions, errors, and principles in conflict with the Catholic
religion and its doctrines.</q> Of course a civilization cut off from any
true Christianity by education and science, by family life and political
life, a progress, trying to stop the activity of the Church in every
sphere and attacking her in their speech, in newspapers, and in schools,
<pb n='165'/><anchor id='Pg165'/>
cannot demand of the Papacy to join hands with them. No Christian,
whether Catholic or Protestant, can profess this <q>progress.</q> We have
here at the same time a specimen of how they proceed in interpreting
the propositions of the Syllabus in order to discover in them all
possible absurdities. Many propositions are short sentences taken
from the work of an author, or from previous Papal declarations.
Hence they must be understood in the sense of those sources. Furthermore,
attention must be paid to what is specially emphasized. Then,
again, we must remember that by repudiating a proposition only the
contradictory is asserted, but not the contrary; to conclude this would
be to conclude too much. For instance, the seventy-seventh condemned
proposition reads: <q>In our times it is no longer to any purpose that
the Catholic religion should be the sole religion of the state to the exclusion
of all other confessions.</q> According to some, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Frins</hi>, the
contradictory is thus formulated: <q>In our times also it is still to the
purpose....</q> According to others, however, <hi rend='italic'>e.g.</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hoensbroeeh</hi> and
<hi rend='italic'>Goetz</hi>: <q>In our times also it is beneficial....</q> Thus while <hi rend='italic'>Hoensbroech</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Goetz</hi> make the ecclesiastical doctrine appear to read
that it would be beneficial to hold fast to the Catholic as the sole
religion of the state under all circumstances even to-day, the actual
opposite is the doctrine, that this may be yet to the purpose under
certain circumstances. While no reasonable man could object to the
latter, the former is eagerly exploited against the Church (<hi rend='italic'>Heiner</hi>,
Der Syllabus, 1905, p. 31, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>; cf. <hi rend='italic'>Frins</hi>, Kirchenlex, 2d ed., XI, 1031;
<hi rend='italic'>Hoensbroech</hi>, l. c. 25; <hi rend='italic'>Goetz</hi>, Der Ultramontanismus, 1905, 148).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Of course it may be taken for granted that the Syllabus is
distasteful to modern liberalism, which is branded there as
one of the errors of the day. Yet the Church cannot be censured
for not becoming unfaithful to her vocation of preserving
the patrimony of Christianity to mankind, or for acting as the
invincible defender of the Christian religion in the universal
struggle between truth and error, even though the latter pose
with great assurance.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Condemnation of Modernism.</head>

<p>
The great excitement caused in intellectual circles by the
Syllabus of <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> was aroused again, though not with the
same intensity, when some years ago the news of another Syllabus
was circulated through the world, and the excitement increased
when the rumour was followed by the publication of the encyclical
<q>Pascendi Dominici gregis.</q> Indeed, the new event was
not very unlike the former: in the 60's Rome's sentence was
<pb n='166'/><anchor id='Pg166'/>
directed against the Modernism of that period, which called itself
liberalism. The excitement caused by its condemnation was
more intense, because it struck directly at the principles governing
the liberal politics against the Church, which principles were
claimed to be the foundation of the modern state. Now the
Modernism repudiated by the Church's voice was nothing more
than the old humanistic, fundamental, errors of liberalism,
but put in the form of a religious and philosophical view of
the world, and in Catholic garb: it meant man detached from
everything supernatural, and dependent alone on himself in his
intellectual life, more especially in his religious life.
</p>

<p>
Now, as then, similar charges were raised: The Church
is the irreconcilable foe of modern achievements and the opponent
of them; <q>the encyclical aims at modern intellectual
life in all its phases and forms</q> (XX. Jahrh., 1908, 568).
Now, as then, we have the same ambiguity of the terms <q>modern</q>
and <q>progress.</q>
</p>

<p>
What was condemned by the Church? The document <q>Lamentabili
sane exitu,</q> issued by the teaching authority of the
Church on July 3, 1907, is entitled <q>A Decree of the Holy
Congregation of the Roman and General Inquisition or the
Holy Office,</q> which has to watch over the unadulterated preservation
of the faith. The decree soon was christened the <q>New
Syllabus,</q> because of its similarity with the Syllabus of
<hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> In a similar way it condemns sixty-five propositions
against the inspiration and the historical character of Holy Scripture,
against the divine origin of revelation and of faith, against
the divinity of Christ, His Resurrection and His atoning death,
against the Sacraments, and against the Church. These are
component parts of the philosophical religious system of thought
which soon after was set forth and condemned by the encyclical
<q>Pascendi,</q> of September 8, 1907.
</p>

<p>
Modernism is essentially philosophy, combining modern
<emph>agnostic-autonomous subjectivism</emph> with <emph>evolutionism</emph>, and
applied to the Christian religion, which thereby becomes disfigured
beyond recognition. Its chain of thought, excellently
stated by the encyclical, starts with the proposition that the
supernatural is beyond the knowledge of man, and hence man
<pb n='167'/><anchor id='Pg167'/>
cannot know anything of God. The faith which unites us to
God is nothing but a feeling, born of a blind impulse, which
may be considered a divine revelation. If this religious feeling
is expressed in forms, the result is <q>doctrines of faith</q>; for
Christian <q>dogmas</q> are this and nothing more, images and
symbols of the noble and divine, hence they are of human
origin and are changeable according to the disposition and the
degree of learning of the individual, as well as of the times.
There is no dogmatic Christianity, in the sense of an immutable
religious doctrine, nor is there any absolutely true
religion, for religion is but a variable feeling, that has nothing
to do with cognition and knowledge. For this reason they never
can come in conflict. The Christian religion originally was
nothing else but the religious experience of Christ, who was
not God but a man; in the course of time it has undergone
changes which are reflected in the shaping of Christian dogma.
Holy Scripture is, similarly, the expression of the religious experience
of its human authors; the Sacraments are symbols,
arousing religious sentiments; the Church is not founded by
God, and only has the task of regulating the development of
Christianity, and of sanctioning at any time whatever religious
experiences the changeable spirit of progressive civilization may
produce.
</p>

<p>
This is Modernism, as represented chiefly in France, Italy,
and to an extent also in England; in Germany it did not appear
as a system, but even there its spirit became quite apparent.
Thus, Modernism is nothing else but the systematic arrangement
of those ideas which we have hitherto met, in various places, as
the fundamental principles of modern religious thought opposed
to Christianity. It is subjectivism with its autonomy
of the human subject, its agnosticism, its relativism of truth,
sailing under the name of <q>historical method of thought</q> and
<q>progress,</q> and, finally, with its freedom of thought and conscience
which rejects all authority. It is <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> in the robe of
a Catholic theologian. Ultimately it is nothing else but the
shocking negation of everything supernatural, hence complete
apostasy. <q>The salient point is recognized,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Troeltsch</hi>,
<q>the enemy is the modern historical method of thought, the
<pb n='168'/><anchor id='Pg168'/>
concept of evolution, the theory of inner experience and relativism
as applied to religion, the negation of supernaturalism as
taught by the old Church</q> (l. c. 22). Hence, was it not manifest
that the Church had to take measures against this positive
denial of Christianity as a whole, the more so as the uneducated
could be easily deceived by it? Every organism will throw off excrescences,
the more energetically the stronger it is. Any religion
lacking this strength is doomed. That the Papal declaration
aroused such opposition must not be wondered at; it hit once
more the central idea of the anti-Christian view of the world.
The judgment was not passed against modern intellectual life,
but only against the grave errors inherent in it; the Church did
not condemn progress, nor the increase and deepening of knowledge
of the truth; not the enrichment of the life of the mind,
of feeling, and the will, but only pretended progress; she did
not condemn the historical method nor the idea of evolution,
but their false application, which dissolved anything and everything
in growth, purely natural growth at that, without acknowledging
a revelation of absolute truths.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Orthodox Protestants have openly praised this bold deed of the
Pope as highly meritorious for the preservation of the Christian faith.
Thus the South African Church Quarterly Review (Episcopal) of January,
1908, said: <q>The Syllabus and Encyclical of <hi rend='italic'>Pius X.</hi> against Modernism
are deserving of the respectful consideration of all Christians....
At the present stage of history the opposing factors are driving with
great speed towards a fierce and resolute struggle between Christ and
anti-Christ. All who sincerely love Christ, our Lord, must rally under
one flag.... Narrow-minded hostility towards the Pope must give way
to the desire to be united with the great community which is fighting
so valiantly for the old faith of our fathers.... One must be blind, to
misjudge the tremendous influence exerted by the last deed of the
Pope in favour of the faith.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even the Evangelical <q>Kirchenzeitung</q> admitted that the encyclical
is <q>directed chiefly against the more or less unchristian modern views
of the world ... which we must combat.... Undoubtedly it is not
only the Pope's right to lay bare the unchristian tendency of these
ideas and their incompatibility with the Christian faith, but it is
also his duty and his merit</q> (November 29, 1908, n. 48).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Puny men, entangled in the ideas of their time and surroundings,
are easily led to take for their standard the
thoughts and actions of their age. They often imagine that
<pb n='169'/><anchor id='Pg169'/>
they possess not a little strength and independence, when they
are intellectually entirely dependent and unable to rise above
their time. <q>It is the fashion, others think that way, therefore
I must think so, too</q>; these are often the principles of
their wisdom, and they ask the Church to do likewise. The
Church, however, looks back upon a long history, and numerous
ideas and opinions she has seen arise and vanish. And whoever
can look back upon a great experience, and moreover carries in
himself the call to lead the times, feels no restless impulse to
be carried away by changing doctrines.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Index.</head>

<p>
Whenever the subject of Rome's enmity to science and
progress of culture is discussed, there invariably appears on the
scene, beside Syllabus and <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, also the Index. The latter
is held by many to be Rome's permanent means of hindering
the progress of humanity in general, and the free scientific
activity of the Catholic in particular, and to annihilate the
freedom of teaching and learning (<hi rend='italic'>Hoensbroech</hi>, Die Kath.
theol. Fakultaeten, 1907, 40 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). They say <q>the Congregation
of the Index has no pity nor consideration for the
classical works of literature, and condemns in the name of religion
the most admirable products of the human intellect</q>
(Grande Dict. univ. du XIX. siècle, IX, 640, apud <hi rend='italic'>J. Hilgers</hi>,
Der Index der Verb. Buecher, 1904, 166; much of what we
shall say on this topic is taken from this work by <hi rend='italic'>Hilgers</hi>).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This statement again reminds that the accusations against the
Catholic Church and her institutions are to be considered with caution,
because of the ignorance of her opponents in Catholic things. This is
especially true of the Index. Thus the above assertion is false. <hi rend='italic'>Dante's</hi>
<q>Divina Commedia</q> (the work referred to) is neither forbidden nor
needs approval nor correction: of the classical literature of the world
little or nothing is forbidden; even morally offensive books, that are
considered classical, may without ecclesiastical permission be read for
the sake of their elegant diction, whenever their reading is required
by one's work or duty of teaching.
</p>

<p>
A few examples of the <emph>incredible ignorance</emph> alluded to will suffice.
In the <q>Grande Dictionnaire Universel du XIX. Siècle</q> it is actually
stated that the works of <hi rend='italic'>Albert the Great</hi> were condemned by a decree
of April 10, 1666. What does the Index really forbid? It states: <q><foreign lang='it' rend='italic'>Alberto
<pb n='170'/><anchor id='Pg170'/>
Magno, diviso in tre libri, nel primo si tratta della virtu delle
herbe, nel secondo della virtu delle pietre, e nel terzo della virtu di alcuni
animali.</foreign>&mdash;Albert the Great, in three parts: the first treats of the
virtue of plants; the second, of the virtue of stones; and the third,
of the virtue of some animals.</q> It is the title of a little superstitious
book, attributed to <q>Albert the Great</q> by an unknown author.
</p>

<p>
The first edition of the Index of <hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi> in 1900 was sold out
in less than a year; a second edition followed in 1901, and, like the
first, could be had at all booksellers, at a very moderate price. In
December, 1901, there appeared in the Anglo-American weekly, <q>The
Roman World,</q> an article which says that it is difficult to obtain this
list of notorious books forbidden to Catholics, unless one be a Church
official, since only a few copies are printed and even these are not
handled by general book-dealers; hence that no details could be given
about the purchase of the copy referred to; but it was quite evident that
it had commanded a good price. <q>The copy in question, a model of fine
printing, might be worth about $40 to $50, but owing to its rareness, it
had undoubtedly cost $400. The history of this famous Index is interesting.
The one who first hit upon the idea was <hi rend='italic'>Charles V.</hi> of Spain,
about 1550. The first compilation of the book-list was made by the university
of Louvain in 1564, Pope <hi rend='italic'>Paul IV.</hi> assuming the direction of
the edition. It remained for 357 years in the hands of the Pope.</q>
Every one of these statements is false. And just as false is the statement
that the <q>Syllabus condemns not only a book written by a Pope,
but by Pope <hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi> himself.</q> Still it could not surprise us, since
even David's psalter is on the Index! When the Index of <hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi>
was published, Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Max Claar</hi> wrote from Rome to the <q>Neue Freie
Presse</q> of Vienna: <q>On the old Index we find among other things
the Psalms of King David and the Divina Commedia of <hi rend='italic'>Dante</hi>.</q> We
have already stated that the latter was never on the Index. But how
in the world could this man find Holy Scripture condemned on the Index?
Perhaps he found this passage: <q>Il salmista secondo la biblia</q>
and <q>Salmi (sessanta) di David.</q> The first is a superstitious booklet,
the second is a translation of sixty Psalms of David by the heretic,
<hi rend='italic'>Giovanni Diodati</hi>. The learned doctor in all seriousness mistook them
for the Psalms of David (<hi rend='italic'>Hilgers</hi>, 167, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What then is the Index, and how is it to be judged?
</p>

<p>
Ever since the Apostle of the Nations had at Ephesus the
superstitious books burned under his eyes, the Holy Fathers,
Bishops, and Councils since the first centuries of Christianity
have been careful to keep from the faithful writings hurtful to
faith and morals. Thus even in the olden time we find several
catalogues of forbidden books, then followed the Indices of the
Middle Ages. In the year 1571 a special Congregation of
Cardinals was formed, the <q>Congregation of the Index,</q>
which has ever since had charge of the ecclesiastical book-laws.
<pb n='171'/><anchor id='Pg171'/>
The last edition of the Index, obligatory for the whole
Church, emanated from <hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi> The title of the work
now in force reads, <q>The Index of Forbidden Books, revised
and published by order of and in the name of Leo XIII.
1900.</q> It is divided into two parts. The first and shorter
part contains the general book regulations, giving in short
paragraphs the rules on various classes of forbidden books, the
permission required for reading them, the examination to be
made previous to the publication of certain books. The second
part enumerates the writings forbidden by special decree&mdash;the
Index in the particular sense, and the part most often considered.
But it is second in importance to the first, because by far not
all books dangerous to faith and morals are named in it. Most
such books are forbidden by the general laws contained in the
first part, without mentioning the many which are forbidden
by mere common sense.
</p>

<p>
Ecclesiastical legislation on books is composed of two factors:
first, the previous censorship&mdash;certain books must be examined
by ecclesiastical authority before their publication.
Second, the prohibition of books already published.
</p>

<p>
The previous scrutiny in general is delegated to the Bishop;
all books dealing with morals and theology must be submitted.
The license to print the book is to be given if the
book is in accord with the teaching of the Church, in so far
as determined by ecclesiastical authority, the decision based
on it rests solely with the censor; if the author of the book
should fail to see that the passages objected to need revision
he may try to clear himself by stating his reasons; however,
he is also free to submit his work to another Bishop and
to look for a printer in the latter's diocese. If one looks over
the numerous books bearing the ecclesiastical imprimatur, he will
readily notice how much freedom is given, if the author keeps
within the doctrine of the Church.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>condemnation</emph> of a book never strikes at the person
of the author, nor at what he has intended to express by the
passages objected to; judgment is passed only upon what is
actually expressed in them. Hence it is not necessary to give
to the author himself a hearing, or a chance to explain.
<pb n='172'/><anchor id='Pg172'/>
The reason is that the judgment is rendered on the sense of the
passages, not on the meaning of the author. In general those
books and periodicals are forbidden which are likely to do
serious damage to faith and morals. The isolated cases of
indicting the works of Catholic authors in the nineteenth century&mdash;we
may mention <hi rend='italic'>Lamennais</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hermes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guenther</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Loisy</hi>,
and <hi rend='italic'>Schell</hi>&mdash;show that the Church proceeds but slowly and with
consideration against the author involved.
</p>

<p>
To appreciate the Index properly, one must try to grasp without
prejudice the <emph>purpose</emph> the Church has in view. This purpose
is to protect the faithful from error and from moral contagion,
and to preserve the faith intact. <q>What is more
precious than souls, what more precious than the faith? But
both suffer damage from such reading.</q> Such was the judgment
of the Council of Ephesus when it drew up its book-decrees;
such was the judgment of an <hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi>, of <hi rend='italic'>Leo the
Great</hi>, and of the Holy Fathers; such is still the judgment of
the Church. Books and writings that offend against morals are
a menace to her faithful. They become infected with wrong
ideas; they are as a rule not in a position to distinguish by
themselves the false from the true, and for the most part they
are not morally strong enough to resist the allurements of error.
It may also happen that certain thoughts are true in the abstract,
yet for the time being would be a danger for many.
Now, it is the right and duty of any social authority, beginning
with the head of the family and up to the government, to protect
with strong hand the precious possessions of its subjects.
</p>

<p>
The state keeps under control the sale of poison and dynamite,
keeps out contagious diseases from its boundaries&mdash;it
protects the possessions of its subjects. European states
have for centuries claimed the right to censure books, and
have used it much more rigorously than the Church ever
did, to say nothing of the censures of the Protestant Church
of former times (see abundant proof apud <hi rend='italic'>Hilgers</hi>, 206-402).
The modern state also, despite the great freedom granted to
the press, cannot entirely forego its sense of responsibility. It
restricts the freedom of the press by censorship, and by preventive
measures often not less drastic than the censure itself, and it
<pb n='173'/><anchor id='Pg173'/>
always regards the confiscation of particularly dangerous writings
to be a matter of course. It puts under censure school-books,
political posters, and theatrical plays, and does not tolerate any
socialistic literature in the soldiers' barracks. And do we not
take it as a matter of course if a father forbids his child to
associate with dangerous playmates, and takes bad books from
its hands? We cannot find fault with the Church if she seeks
to protect her children, if she represses the promiscuous dissemination
of false ideas and doctrines, and if she takes dangerous
books under her control. <q>Feed my lambs, feed my
sheep,</q> was the command given to the Church.
</p>

<p>
The objection should therefore not be made that <q>such precaution
is proper when dealing with children but not with men;
especially since the thinking elements among the Catholics of
the Germanic tongue or origin are too profound and firm in
their faith to warrant a fear of the effects of unrestricted free
research</q> (from the petition of the so-called <q>Index-league</q>
of Muenster). This perusal may become dangerous even for
highly educated men, else how could Modernism break so
forcefully into the Church? Manifestly only because learned
theologians did not possess that firmness of Catholic faith
and Catholic knowledge which would prevent them from
being deceived by the misleading ideas of modern philosophy,
and of the new Protestant theology. Moreover, all forbidden
books may be read upon obtaining the necessary permission.
</p>

<p>
<q>Preserve the deposit of faith,</q> the Church has been told.
She cannot look on silently when her doctrines are being
falsified and denied, when the most venerable sphere of theology
is made the stamping ground for immature minds and
a laboratory for all kinds of experiments. When <hi rend='italic'>Zola's</hi> novel,
<q>Rome,</q> had been put on the Index, the atheistic literary critic,
<hi rend='italic'>Sarcey</hi>, made the following comment: <q>If my own criticisms
of literature are regarded by many people as highest decisions,
why should a positive criticism be looked upon as monstrous just
because it comes from the Pope? It is my aim to guard good
taste in literature, and it is the aim of the Pope to guard the
true faith</q> (Allgemeine Rundschau, 1908, 828). Every social
authority must interfere when its foundations are attacked.
<pb n='174'/><anchor id='Pg174'/>
A church that tolerates false doctrines cannot be the teacher
that Christ sent to the nations. As a matter of fact the Index
has from the first helped in no small degree to keep the Catholic
doctrine pure, to induce caution in reading certain authors,
and to keep awake in the faithful that aversion against immoral
and irreligious writings which is the characteristic of
Catholics, and which has rescued the faith for thousands.
</p>

<p>
To judge the Index fairly one must be convinced that the
preservation of true Christian doctrine is its highest aim. Then
the zeal of the Catholic Church will be intelligible. Of course,
he who thinks that the true weal of mankind consists in the
speedy emancipation from all Christian dogma, he who holds
the task of science to be the establishment of a new <q>scientific
view of the world,</q> he who no longer knows faith, will see in
the Index nothing but restraint. But, whoever is of a different
view will not take offence at the restriction of the freedom of
writing and reading when it is productive of higher good.
Freedom of science cannot be unrestricted, especially in regard to
teaching; the welfare of humanity must be considered. Moreover,
the Index concerns almost exclusively theology and some
branches of philosophy, the rest of the profane sciences but
little or not at all; the scientific works prohibited, however, are
not removed from scientific perusal: only permission is necessary,
and this is granted without difficulty and without cost.
</p>

<p>
It is true, an error on the part of the Church authorities
is not impossible. We know of such a case, putting on the
Index the writings of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, in 1616. But just the circumstance
that history knows of but one such case of importance
is a clear testimony to the Holy Ghost's direction of the teaching
office even when it is rendering non-infallible decisions.
Besides, the damage that might result from a few mistakes
would not be so great as the damage resulting if everything
were allowed to be written and read.
</p>

<p>
The Catholic scientist who appreciates the supernatural mission
of his Church will <emph>yield to her guidance in humble
confidence</emph>, he will practise this submission to the Church by
requesting permission for reading forbidden books, and by this
spirit he will obtain God's blessing on his work.
</p>

<pb n='175'/><anchor id='Pg175'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In doing so he may recall to mind the edifying words of <hi rend='italic'>St. Francis
of Sales</hi>, in the preface to his treatise on the errors of the Lutherans
and Calvinists, where he gives the assurance of having conscientiously
asked for and received permission to read their writings. <q>We fervently
request our Catholic readers,</q> writes the Saint, <q>not to let
an evil suspicion against us arise, as if we had read the forbidden
books in spite of the prohibition of holy Church. We are able to
assure them in all truth of having done nothing forbidden to a good
Christian, and of having taken every precaution due in a matter
of so vast importance, so as not to incur in any way the very just
censures of the Church, nor in any manner to violate the profound
reverence we owe to her.</q> The permission granted him, dated July 16,
1608, is still extant; likewise one asked by <hi rend='italic'>St. Charles Borromeo</hi>.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The Catholic scientist also will readily ask the ecclesiastical
Imprimatur for certain of his works. If a careful author
before publishing a work submits the proofs to a friend of
his profession, taking his comment for a guide, why should
we deem it intellectual bondage if the Catholic scientist, in
matters of faith and morals, submits his work to the formal
approval of his Church, which to him is a higher authority
than any other? and does this willingly, as in consistency with
his Catholic conviction?<note place='foot'>At a certain Austrian university, where the custom obtains that
a member of a faculty of the university, in the regular order of the
faculties, publishes during the year a book on some study in its particular
branch, the turn came to the theological faculty. One of its members
then issued a work on moral theology, of course with the ecclesiastical
Imprimatur. Upon this being discovered the senate resolved not to
acknowledge the book as a university publication, nor to issue it as
such, as is usually the custom. They believed they saw in the Imprimatur
a degradation of science and a violation of its freedom&mdash;a
procedure entirely in accord with the traditional narrow-mindedness
and intolerance of liberalism.</note>
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Via stulti recta in oculis ejus, qui autem sapiens est audit
consilia</foreign>, says the Wise Man. It is characteristic of the fool
to be wise in his own eyes, and stubbornly to cling to his
own judgment; but the prudent man seeks advice, and suffers
his attention to be called to his mistakes.
</p>

<p>
The believing scientist, too, will submit to correction; should
the rare case fall to his lot to have the Church condemn his work,
he will know how to be generously obedient. Splendid examples
are blazing the way for him. <q>Were we to draw up a list of
the scientists, who, in a similar critical position as <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon</hi>,
<pb n='176'/><anchor id='Pg176'/>
found strength in the virtue of obedience, and on the other
hand a list of all those whose subjective scientific views did
not allow them to submit, then we should perceive at a glance
that their proud persistence in their own opinion has been injurious
to true wisdom in the same degree as humble submission
proved a benefit to science</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hilgers</hi>, 412). Finally, he who
is convinced that the Christian faith is the greatest heritance
of truth from the past, which must be preserved in him, he will
take no offence if the Church is not impressed even by names
like <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>, men much featured
as the captains of modern science and philosophy. In the eyes
of the Church nothing is genuine and true science that is contrary
to the testimony of God, and errors are errors even
then when their perpetrator is receiving cheers and applause.
Just as the state prohibits the physician from designedly assisting
any one to commit suicide, even though the physician be a
noted scientist, just so the Church opposes any one who assaults
God's truth, be he journalist or philosopher.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Frequently the <emph>great number of forbidden books mentioned by
the Index</emph> is pointed out. The Index of 1900 contains about 5,000 titles
belonging to the last three centuries; of these about 1,300 belong
to the nineteenth century. Quite a small number, considering the immense
literature of the world. Yet it will look even smaller when compared,
for instance, with the censure of books by the <emph>Prussian state</emph>.
</p>

<p>
In the year 1845 there appeared the following catalogue: <q>Index
<hi rend='italic'>librorum prohibitorum</hi>, Catalogue of the books forbidden in Germany
during 1844-1845, first volume.</q> The second volume was issued
in 1846. The list is not complete: it does not contain, for instance,
the names of prohibited newspapers and periodicals. Yet it contains
437 writings, forbidden by 570 decrees, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, two or three times as many
as the entire number of German books of the nineteenth century enumerated
by name in the Roman Index. The <q>Historisch-Politischen Blaetter</q>
of 1840 contain an article beginning thus: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Veritas odium parit.</foreign>
In Prussia there are now prohibited nearly all Catholic journals and
periodicals, and in order to begin the matter <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>ab ovo</foreign> they have grasped
a welcome opportunity to throw interdicts at wholesale against works
not yet published, or to render their circulation difficult to a degree
amounting to prohibition.</q>
</p>

<p>
How the Prussian censorship proceeded in those days may be illustrated
by another example. <q>At the time of the Vatican Council a
publisher, <hi rend='italic'>Joseph Bachem</hi>, came to Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Westhoff</hi>, rector of the Seminary
of Cologne, a man of venerable years, and told him of his misgivings
about the dogma of the infallibility. In his youth he had been taught
the maxim that that is Catholic which has been taught always, everywhere,
<pb n='177'/><anchor id='Pg177'/>
and by everybody; yet he had until recently never found the doctrine
of Papal Infallibility taught, neither in schools nor in text-books.
Then the reverend old rector took the visitor by the hand and led him
into the library of the seminary, where he showed him not less than sixteen
catechisms that had been in use in the Archdiocese of Cologne during
the eighteenth century, and which stated without exception, clearly
and convincingly, the doctrine of Papal Infallibility in matters of faith
and morals. The publisher in utter astonishment then asked how it was
that this doctrine was not taught in later editions. Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Westhoff</hi> referred
him to the Prussian censure, enforced until 1848, which had expunged
this doctrine from all Catholic catechisms. From that moment
<hi rend='italic'>Bachem</hi> no longer wavered in his opinions</q> (Koelnische Volkszeitung,
September 7, 1893).
</p>

<p>
One may also remember <hi rend='italic'>Bismarck's</hi> press-campaign during the
<hi rend='italic'>Kulturkampf</hi>. Professor <hi rend='italic'>Friedberg</hi>, Prussian court canonist, instigated
this campaign, and in many ways devised the plan of attack.
This much-praised liberalism&mdash;how tyrannically it proceeded against
the Catholic press! The Frankfurter Zeitung in those days took a
census of convictions due to the press law. According to the census,
which <q>does not by far claim to be complete,</q> there were of newspaper
editors sentenced in 1875&mdash;21 in January, 35 in February, 29 in
March, 24 in April; in four months 137 newspaper writers were either
fined or sent to jail. During the same period 30 newspapers were confiscated
(Staatslexikon, IV, 550). This is not all. <q>We could mention
at least three instances,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>P. Majunke</hi> in his History of the Kulturkampf,
<q>where agents of the Berlin secret police have succeeded in obtaining
a position on the editorial staff of Catholic papers, staying for a
year or more. Besides serving as spies these fellows had to perform the
task of <foreign lang='fr' rend='italic'>agents provocateurs</foreign>, viz., to incite the editors of Catholic papers
to extreme utterances, similar to the denunciations suggested to correspondents
of foreign Catholic organs for their papers.</q> This happened
in a civilized state, despite its constitutional freedom of the press,
by order of the same liberalism which always pretends to be full of
righteous indignation when the Church prohibits books and puts them
on the Index.
</p>

<p>
Towards the end of the last century, again with the aid of liberalism,
laws against the socialists were drawn up. After they had been passed
war was waged against socialistic literature. In the year 1886 there
appeared a real Index Librorum Prohibitorum, its title read, <q>Social
Democratic publications and societies prohibited by the imperial law
against the dangerous designs of Social Democracy,</q> which law had
then been in force eight years. A supplementary list was published two
years later, in 1888. <hi rend='italic'>Hilgers</hi> makes this comment on it: <q>How many
additional pamphlets have been condemned in the time from March 28,
1888, to September 30, 1890, we cannot state.</q> According to the foregoing
official statement the average is 130 a year. Hence we assume
that the printed matter prohibited during the twelve years that the
law was in force amounted to between 15,000 and 16,000. This number
of social democratic pamphlets forbidden within twelve years exceeds by
far the number of all books prohibited by the Roman Index in the course
<pb n='178'/><anchor id='Pg178'/>
of the entire nineteenth century&mdash;books that are the products of all
countries in the world and dealing with all branches; the number of
these German prohibitions is ten times that of Roman prohibitions. Indeed,
in the course of a year and a half the new German Empire prohibited
more writings of Germans than Rome had prohibited during the
entire past century. We may mention here <hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi>. In the atheism dispute,
at the end of the eighteenth century, decision was rendered upon
<hi rend='italic'>Goethe's</hi> advice against the philosopher <hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi>; <hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi> was discharged in
spite of petitions and mediations in his favour. The liberal Grand Duke
<hi rend='italic'>Karl August of Saxony Weimar</hi> granted in 1816, after the French conqueror
had been overthrown, freedom of the press. Professor <hi rend='italic'>Oken</hi> of
Jena availed himself of this privilege, and printed in his <q>Isis</q> contributions
complaining about the government. <hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi> had to advise what
should be done against it. He thought that the paper should have been
suppressed by the police at its very first announcement; <q>the measure
neglected at the beginning is to be taken immediately and the paper is
to be prohibited. By prohibiting the <q>Isis</q> the trouble will be stopped
at once</q> (Briefwechsel des Grossh. <hi rend='italic'>Karl August v. Sax.-Weimar-Eisenach</hi>
mit <hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi>, II, 1863, 90). And this was done, in spite of the
freedom granted the press.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi> is called the Royal Free-thinker; and yet the general introduction
of the book censure into Prussia occurred precisely during his
reign. The first general censure edict was issued in 1749 and remained
in force till the death of the king. All books, even those printed in
foreign tongues, were subject to the censure. Even all episcopal and
Papal proclamations were subjected to the royal censure. That the
leaders in the Reformation and their successors were not prevented
by their avowal of the principle of free research from exercising rigorous,
often tyrannical, censure, not only against the Catholics but also
against their fellow reformers, is well known.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>M. Lehmann</hi> writes in the Preuss. Jahrb. 1902: <q>It claims to be
infallible, this Papal Church, it wants to be to the faithful everything, in
science and even in nationality. It offends every nation. The Index
in the shape given it in 1900 by the present Pope proscribes the
<q>Oeuvres du Philosophe de Sanssouci,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> <q>Critique of Pure Reason,</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Ranke's</hi> <q>History of the Popes,</q> the greatest German king, the greatest
German philosopher, and the greatest German historian</q> (1902, no. 8).
</p>

<p>
As to <hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi>, his own works appeared only after his death in
1788, and even then only in part; later on there were other editions.
None of these is put on the Index. On this list we find since 1760 the
<q>Oeuvres du Philosophe de Sanssouci.</q> Under this title appeared at
first three volumes, in but a few copies, intended for the most intimate
friends of the king. The first volume he soon withdrew and had
it burned of his own accord; it contained the <q>Palladion</q> an imitation
of Voltaire's <q>Pucelle,</q> a salacious work throughout. In 1762 a new
edition was issued. It also contains a philosophical treatise denying the
immortality of the soul; this treatise was also published separately
and specially prohibited in 1767. A third work put on the Index is a
spurious attack on the Popes published by order of King <hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi>,
with a preface by him. Its author is said to have been the French
<pb n='179'/><anchor id='Pg179'/>
abbé <hi rend='italic'>Jean Martin De Prades</hi>, reader to the king. These are the indicted
works of <hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi>, all written in French and in substance
French Voltairianism. Thus came the greatest German king on the
Index!
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Ranke's</hi> <q>Roemische Paepste</q> is on the Index, because the book
belittles the constitutions and doctrines of the Catholic Church: not
because of the true things the author says about Popes. <hi rend='italic'>Von Pastor's</hi>
<q>History of the Popes</q> is not on the Index, notwithstanding the bitter
truths he writes about Popes <hi rend='italic'>Alexander VI.</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Leo X.</hi>
</p>

<p>
He who knows even the fundamental ideas of <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> <q>Kritik der
reinen Vernunft</q> will see that not only the Catholic Church, but every
Christian denomination, might forfeit its existence if it showed itself
indifferent towards it. Heresies are especially dangerous to the uneducated
when they bear the names of authors of scientific repute.
But the Church willingly grants the permission to read them when
there is reason for it. Moreover, it was not Rome alone that took steps
against <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>. This was done by the Prussian king <hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi> also.
One may recall his cabinet order, under minister <hi rend='italic'>Woellner</hi>, against
Kant's <q>Religion innerhalb der Grenzen der blossen Vernunft.</q> Similarly
the works of <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi> were proceeded against, whereas his indictment
by Rome now calls forth protest because he has since been assigned a
prominent place among philosophers. <hi rend='italic'>Freudenthal</hi> registers a list of 500
sharp prohibitions issued against <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza's</hi> works during the years 1556-1580:
they were condemned by the states of Holland, by the court, by
synods and magistrates. Those judgments were passed during a period
when the competent authorities had views different from those of to-day;
when the state deemed it its duty to oppose the undermining of Christianity.
The state's judgment has changed in many ways, Rome's judgment
has remained the same. But the works of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Spinoza</hi> likewise
have remained the same, and so is Christianity, against which they
occupy an irreconcilable position, still the same.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<q>In the moral world nothing can support that cannot also
resist</q> is a truthful saying of <hi rend='italic'>Treitschke</hi>: it is also the principle
of the Catholic Church. Without ever surrendering to
the unchristian tendency of a time, she opposes error with unsubdued
courage. If this be intolerance, it is not intolerance
towards erring men but towards their errors, it is the intolerance
that the gardener shows in uprooting harmful weeds, it is the
intolerance of the physician towards disease. Obedience to the
Index makes high moral demands upon the Catholic. But it
has been characteristic of the Christian religion and of its faithful
children never to shrink before any moral action where it appeared
demanded. And if the preservation of moral purity exacts
conscientious discipline, this is also true of the preservation of
the pure faith, especially at a time when a neo-paganism in
<pb n='180'/><anchor id='Pg180'/>
league with an uncontrolled mania for reading is threatening
in many forms.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Galileo, and Other Topics.</head>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo Galilei</hi>&mdash;but few names have achieved equal fame.
Men like <hi rend='italic'>Alexander</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Cæsar</hi>, like <hi rend='italic'>Homer</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Dante</hi>, have
scarcely succeeded in writing their names with a sharper pencil
on the tablet of history than the astronomer of Pisa. His
grand discoveries in natural science have done little to crown
his temples with the wreath of immortality&mdash;it was the fate
of his life that did it. And one may add: if this fate had
been caused by the French government, or by a Protestant
General Assembly, he would never have obtained his position
in history; but since this lot came to him by the human
limitation of a Roman Church authority, his name is not only
entered on the calendar of the anti-Roman journalist, it also
stands surrounded with the halo of a Martyr in the esteem of
serious scientists, who see in <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> and in the consequent condemnation
of the Copernican system the proof that dogma and
science cannot agree, that the Catholic Church assumes a hostile
attitude toward science. Whenever this theme is mentioned,
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> ghost is paraded. For this reason we cannot pass by
this fact of history. To a son of the Church they are unpleasant
recollections, but this shall not keep us from looking
history firmly in the eye.
</p>

<p>
There are some other charges brought forth from history, but
the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> case overshadows them all. We shall touch upon
them but briefly, and then return to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Attention is called to the Church's condemnation of the
<emph>doctrine of Antipodes</emph>. The Priest <hi rend='italic'>Vigilius</hi> was accused in
Rome, in 747, of having taught that there exists another world
under the earth, and other people also, or another sun and moon
(<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>quod alius mundus et alii homines sub terra sint seu sol et
luna</foreign>). Such was his doctrine as stated by Pope <hi rend='italic'>Zacharias</hi>
in his reply to <hi rend='italic'>Boniface</hi>, the Apostle of Germany, in which he said
that he had cited <hi rend='italic'>Vigilius</hi> to Rome in order that his doctrine
be thoroughly investigated: if it should turn out that this had
<pb n='181'/><anchor id='Pg181'/>
really been taught by him, he would be condemned. Further
particulars of his teaching are unknown, because it is mentioned
only in the above passage. The assertion ascribed to him is
that there is another world besides this one, with other inhabitants
and with another sun and moon&mdash;an assertion scientifically
absurd and dogmatically inadmissible, as this might
call in question the common descent of mankind from one
pair of parents. The anxiety and rebuke of the Pope is
directed solely against the latter point. The condemnation of
<hi rend='italic'>Vigilius</hi> has never taken place, for he remained in his office,
won great respect, was elevated to the bishopric of Salzburg,
and later canonized by <hi rend='italic'>Gregory IX.</hi> Had a condemnation
of his particular doctrine taken place, this would not have involved
the condemnation of the antipodean theory, in the sense
that the side of the globe opposite to us is also inhabited by
human beings, a proposition which does not conflict with any
doctrine of faith. The doctrine described above has another
tendency. The entire case is hidden in obscurity (<hi rend='italic'>Hefele</hi>,
Conc. Gesch., 2d ed., III, 557 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, it has been said that at the time when the
universities were in close union with the Church, medical science
could not advance because the Church had prohibited
human <emph>anatomy</emph> (Prof. <hi rend='italic'>J. H. van't Hoff</hi>, Neue Freie Presse,
December 29, 1907). In amplification it was said: <q><hi rend='italic'>Boniface
VIII.</hi> had forbidden every anatomical dissection of a body</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>O. Zoeckler</hi>, Theologie und Naturwissenschaft, 1877, I, 342).
What is true of this assertion?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the first place, <hi rend='italic'>Boniface VIII.</hi> did not forbid anatomy. He merely
prohibited in 1299 and 1300 the hideous custom then prevailing regarding
the bodies of noblemen who had died away from home: they were disembowelled,
dissected, and boiled, for the purpose of removing the flesh
from the bones so that the latter could be transported the more easily.
This process had nothing to do with anatomy. The wish to possess the
bones of the dead did not seem to the Pope a sufficient reason for treating
the human body in such a way (Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Michael</hi>, Gesch. des deutschen
Volkes III, 1903, 433). Nor does history know of any other prohibition
of anatomy by the Church. It tells us, however, that <hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi> in
his excellent rules for the benefit of his Sicilian kingdom in the regulation
of medical science among other things emphasizes the study of
surgery: he ordered that no one be allowed to practise surgery who
<pb n='182'/><anchor id='Pg182'/>
could not show by attestation of his professors that he had studied
surgery for at least one year, especially that he had learned at school
how to dissect bodies; a physician must be perfect in anatomy, else
he may not undertake operations (<hi rend='italic'>Michael</hi>, l. c. 430). This was done
and practised under the eyes of the Church. The accusers also seem
ignorant of the fact that bodies of those executed were given to universities
for dissection. In the year 1336 the medical students of Montpellier,
the famous medical school under the immediate direction of
the Church (see above, page 154) were granted the privilege of obtaining
once a year an executed criminal's body for dissection. The same
privilege was extended to the medical students of Lerida by King
<hi rend='italic'>Juan I.</hi> on June 3, 1391, who decreed that the delinquent should be
drowned <hi rend='italic'>pro speriencia seu anatomia fienda</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Denifle</hi>, Die Universitaeten
des Mittelalters, I, 1885, 507).
</p>

<p>
The story is also circulated that the fourth Lateran Council in
1215 prohibited monks from studying natural sciences and medicine
(Deutschoester. Lehrerzeitung 15th Dec., 1909). It will suffice to
quote this particular decree of the Lateran Council: <q>No clergyman is
allowed to pronounce capital sentence, nor to execute it, nor to be present
at its execution. No clergyman is allowed to draw up a document
concerning a death sentence: at the courts this should be done by laymen.
No clergyman is allowed to assume command of Rotarians (freebooters),
of archers or any others who shed human blood; no subdeacon,
deacon, or priest is allowed to practise that part of surgery by which cutting
and burning is done, nor must any one pronounce a benediction at
an ordeal</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hefele</hi>, Koncil. Gesch., 2d ed., V, 1887, 887). This will thoroughly
dispose of that charge.
</p>

<p>
Just as briefly may we settle the story of <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi> having been
excommunicated because of his intention to discover new lands. It is
said that the <q>Spanish clergy denounced his plans as against the faith,
and that the Council of Salamanca excommunicated him</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. Draper</hi>,
ibid. 163). This is a fairy tale. The truth is, that King <hi rend='italic'>Ferdinand</hi>
and Queen <hi rend='italic'>Isabella</hi> referred the plans of the bold Genoese to a council
of scientists and ecclesiastical dignitaries, which was held in the Dominican
Monastery of Salamanca, <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi> being present. There never
was a Council of Salamanca. <hi rend='italic'>Weiss</hi> writes in his <q>History of the
World</q>: <q>Much has been surmised concerning the objections and their
refutation. It is only certain that the majority rejected the plan as
impossible of execution, and that <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi> won over a minority of
them, especially the priests, among whom the learned Dominican <hi rend='italic'>Deza</hi>
deserves mention</q> (Weltgesch. VII, 187). <hi rend='italic'>Denthofen</hi>, in his biography
of <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi>, says: <q>The Dominican Fathers supported him during the
long time the conference lasted, and even defrayed the expenses of his
journey. Father <hi rend='italic'>Diego de Deza</hi>, chief professor of theology, was convinced
by the reasons of <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi>, and in turn convinced the more
learned of his confrères. The majority, however, thought the idea but
a phantom, while others deemed it impracticable. The conference adjourned
without coming to any definite decision</q> (Christof Columbus,
Eine biographische Skizze ..., 1878, 21). <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi> found his
warmest friend in the learned Father <hi rend='italic'>Juan Perez</hi>, Guardian of the
<pb n='183'/><anchor id='Pg183'/>
Franciscan Monastery of St. Maria de la Rabida. Within the quiet
walls of this cloister <hi rend='italic'>Columbus'</hi> plans were disclosed for the first time
in Spain, and admired and resolved upon. <hi rend='italic'>Perez</hi> spoke untiringly to
Isabella in favour of the plan, and even aided <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi> in gathering
men for his crew. This is the fact about the anathema the Church is
paid to have pronounced on <hi rend='italic'>Columbus</hi>.
</p>

<p>
But let us return to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>.<note place='foot'>A clear understanding of the case of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> has been made
possible only since the year 1877, when the papers of the trial were
published by two men of opposite religious views,&mdash;the Catholic-minded
historian, <hi rend='italic'>de l'Epinois</hi>, and the liberal author, <hi rend='italic'>K. Gebler</hi>, who in 1876 had
already published a work on <q>Galileo Galilei and the Roman Curia,</q>
in the spirit of the anti-clerical tendency of the times. Yet, in spite of
his attitude, he was given free permission to copy the papers&mdash;a magnanimity
by which the Holy See has earned the gratitude and admiration
of every fair-minded lover of history. In more recent times, <hi rend='italic'>A. Favaro</hi>
published, in 1890-1907, a work of twenty volumes containing all the
papers relating to the trial of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, <q>Opere di Galileo Galilei,
Edizione Nazionale.</q> He, too, had access to the ecclesiastical archives,
which he acknowledges with thanks. It may be said now that the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
case has been settled by documentary evidence.</note>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo Galilei</hi>, the great Italian physicist, was born in
1564, at Pisa. At first he was professor in his native town,
then at Padua, where he taught the doctrine of <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi>,
although at that time there was no obstacle to accepting the
Copernican system. In 1611 he became mathematician at the
court of <hi rend='italic'>Cosimo II.</hi> at Florence. His talents and happy discoveries
soon won fame. In general he was more of a physicist
than an astronomer; his astronomical discoveries were, almost
without exception, of a kind that did not presuppose a thorough
astronomical training. As is known, he was not the original
inventor of the telescope, though with its aid he achieved some
of the most important of his discoveries; for instance, that of
the satellites of Jupiter. The telescope was invented in Holland.
</p>

<p>
When he went to Rome, in 1611, he was received with great
honour. In one of his letters from there he wrote: <q>I have
received marked favours from many Cardinals and prelates
here, and from several princes. They wanted to hear of my
inventions, and were all well pleased.</q> The Jesuits gave a special
reception in his honour at the Roman College. This
shows in what esteem science was then held at Rome. But
<pb n='184'/><anchor id='Pg184'/>
five years later <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> returned to the Eternal City under
quite different circumstances. What had happened? In 1612
he had issued a treatise on <q>The History and Explanation of
the Sun-spots,</q> in which he declared unreservedly for the
Copernican system. And this caused the change. True,
<hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> himself was a Catholic Priest, and had dedicated
his principal work to Pope <hi rend='italic'>Paul III.</hi> But it was generally
supposed that he had brought forward the doctrine only as
an hypothesis, only to illustrate and facilitate calculations, not
claiming for it absolute certainty. This assumption was based
on the preface of the first edition of his book, containing
assurance to that effect. That preface, however, was not the
work of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, but had been smuggled into the book by
the Protestant publisher <hi rend='italic'>Osiander</hi>, without the author's knowledge,
because <hi rend='italic'>Osiander</hi> feared <emph>his own</emph> church authorities.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> spoke in quite another tone. He defended the doctrine
as true. He soon aroused opposition. Men standing for
the geocentric theory were opposed by others, siding with <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
for the solar system, such as the learned Benedictine, <hi rend='italic'>Castelli</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> great bitterness and sarcasm in dealing with his
opponents aggravated the quarrel with the <q>partisans of <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>.</q>
Extreme irritability and love of praise were prominent
traits of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> character.
</p>

<p>
It was the custom of that time to bring Scripture into controversies
about nature. This was done also in <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> case.
Passages were quoted against him, referring to the <q>rising and
setting sun,</q> to the <q>earth that never moves,</q> of <hi rend='italic'>Joshua's</hi>
<q>commanding the sun to stand still.</q> This prompted <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
to cross over into the field of theology himself. In a letter to
<hi rend='italic'>Castelli</hi> in 1613 he says: <q>Holy Writ can never lie nor err; on
the contrary, its sayings are absolute and incontestable truth;
but its interpreters are liable to err in various ways, and it is
a fatal and very common mistake to stop always at the literal
sense</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, even prior to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, had interpreted the respective
passages of the Scriptures properly and with surprising
skill; especially in his introduction to his <q>Astronomia nova.</q>
Cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Anschuetz</hi>, Johannes Kepler als Exeget. Zeitschrift für
katholische Theologie, XI, 1887, 1-24).
</p>

<pb n='185'/><anchor id='Pg185'/>

<p>
Correct as these arguments were, it was nevertheless imprudent
for the court mathematician to trespass upon grounds regarded
by theologians as their own, instead of furnishing natural
scientific proofs. Thus the matter was brought to Rome before
the Congregation of the Inquisition. <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, worrying about
his case, went voluntarily to Rome, in 1615. He failed
to assuage the opposition against his theory, though he says
he was received favourably by the princes of the Church.
Moreover, heedless of the admonition of his friends, he pursued
the matter with indiscreet zeal, with vehemence and impetuosity,
practically provoking a decision. Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Bellarmin</hi>
opposed the haste with which the matter was being pressed;
the Jesuit <hi rend='italic'>Grienberger</hi> thought that <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> should first set
forth his proofs, and then speak about the Scriptures. Had scientific
proofs been brought forth, theological difficulties would
have been easily cleared away; but scientific proof was lacking,
and what there perhaps was of it, <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> failed to offer.
</p>

<p>
The right of the Congregation to take up the matter can
hardly be denied, for although the matter was one of natural
sciences, yet, by introducing theology and Scripture, it had
assumed the character of theology and exegesis. <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> personally
was dealt with very leniently. During the discussions
of 1616 he was never cited before the bar of the Inquisition, nor
was his exterior freedom in any way restricted. Only one thing
was done: he was cautioned by Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Bellarmin</hi>, <q>by order
of the Holy Congregation,</q> not to adhere to, nor teach any
longer, the Copernican theory. The documents of the case say
that <q><hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> submitted to this order and promised to obey.</q>
The Congregation of the Index prohibited, March 5, 1616, all
books defending the Copernican theory, declaring the doctrine to
be against Holy Scripture. Even the work of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> was
prohibited <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>donec corrigatur</foreign>&mdash;until it be corrected. A decision
of the year 1620 declared which passages should be
corrected. They are those in which the author speaks of his
theory not as an hypothesis but as of an established truth:
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>non ex hypothesi, sed asserando</foreign>. The Protestant <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, upon
hearing this, wrote: <q>By their imprudent acts some have
caused the work of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> to be condemned, after it had
<pb n='186'/><anchor id='Pg186'/>
been left unmolested for nearly eighty years; and the prohibition
will last at least till the corrections are made. I have been
assured, however, by competent authority, both ecclesiastical and
civil, that the decree was not intended to put any hindrance in
the way of astronomical research</q> (<hi rend='italic'>A. Mueller</hi>, J. Kepler, 1903,
105). The reproach of imprudence was intended for <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To teach the doctrine as an hypothesis was permitted even
to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, and this left the way clear for the development of the
hypothesis, because whatever showed the usefulness of the
hypothesis was sure to increase its value as a truth, but <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
would not keep within these limits. Instead of showing in a
Christian spirit a submission to Providence, which even an erring
authority may demand, he openly violated his promise and
disobeyed the command he had received. In the spring of
1632 there appeared at Florence his <q><hi rend='italic'>Dialogue on the two
most important systems of the world</hi>.</q> It contained an
open, though by no means victorious, defence of the Copernican
system&mdash;seeking to hide under a confidence-inspiring mask.
It contained many passages of caustic sarcasm, with the evident
intention of arousing public opinion against the attitude of the
Roman Congregations. It was a flagrant <emph>violation of the
command given him personally</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The Pope under whom the proceedings against <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> took
place was <hi rend='italic'>Urban VIII.</hi>, who, when a Cardinal, had followed
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> discoveries with enthusiasm, though never partial to
the system of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, and, in accord with the custom of
the age, he had written an ode to <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>.
</p>

<p>
Cited to Rome, <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> came only after repeated urging, on
February 14, 1633. The story of his having been imprisoned
and tortured on this second visit to Rome is false. <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
wrote on April 16 of that year: <q>I live in an apartment of
three rooms, belonging to the Fiscal of the Inquisition, and am
free to move in many rooms. My health is good.</q> This stay
in the apartment belonging to the Inquisition lasted but twenty-two
days; after that <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> was allowed to live in the palace
of the Ambassador of Tuscany. During his whole life <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>
was never even for an hour in a real prison.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> demeanour before the Inquisition bespeaks little
<pb n='187'/><anchor id='Pg187'/>
truthfulness and manliness. It makes a painful impression.
Many other events in his life cast dark shades of insincerity
upon his character, especially his relations with <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>. While
in his dialogue he openly defended the truth of the Copernican
system, while he had written, time and again, that the
theory had been demonstrated by <q>forceful, convincing arguments,</q>
whereas nothing but insignificant reasons could be
pleaded for the contrary, he now assumes the attitude before
the Inquisition of denying that he had championed that theory,
at least not consciously; that he had never taught that doctrine
otherwise than hypothetically. And this he asserts although
he had taken the oath to say nothing but the truth. We
even hear him declare that he considers the doctrine to be false,
and that he was ready to refute it at once.
</p>

<p>
The judges were convinced of the untruthfulness of the defendant.
In those times, in order to obtain further confessions,
especially when the accused had been previously convicted of
guilt, torture was resorted to. This regrettable practice was
then in vogue at every European court; the Inquisition, too,
had adopted it, but strict rules were laid down to guard against
abuses. Very old persons were exempt from the rack; they were
only threatened with it. This happened also in <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> case,
he was never actually put on the rack. Moreover, one can
safely presume that this threat did not terrify him much. His
reading must have enlightened him on this point, and even
without it he must have known the practice by his active intercourse
with those theologians of the Curia who were friendly to
him. In fact, he clung obstinately to his denial, to the very end
of the hearing, although it must be surmised that he would not
have aggravated his case by confession. The commissioner of
Inquisition, <hi rend='italic'>Macolano</hi>, at the first stages of the trial had expressed
his hope that in this event <q>it would be possible to show
indulgence to the guilty, and whatever the result might be, he
would realize the benefit received, apart from all other consequences
to be expected from a desired mutual satisfaction</q>
(Letter to Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Barberini</hi>, April 28, 1633).
</p>

<p>
On June 22 <emph>the final verdict</emph> was rendered: it told the
defendant: <q>Thou art convicted by the Holy Congregation
<pb n='188'/><anchor id='Pg188'/>
of being suspected of heresy, to wit, to have held for true,
and believed in, a false theory, contrary to Holy Writ&mdash;which
makes the sun the centre of the orbit of the earth, without
moving from east to west, and which lets the earth, on the other
hand, move outside the centre of the world, and to have
believed that an opinion may be considered probable and be
defended, though it had been expressly declared to be contrary
to the Scripture.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> was declared suspect of heresy, because,
in the opinion of the judges, he had assumed that a
doctrine in contradiction to the Scriptures might be defended.
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> retracted by oath. That upon retraction he arose and
exclaimed, stamping with his foot, <q><foreign rend='italic'>Pur si muove!</foreign></q> (<q>and
yet it does move!</q>) is a fable. He was sentenced to be jailed
in the Holy Office. But already the next day he was allowed to
go to the palace of the Grand Duke of Tuscany and to consider
that palace his prison. Soon after he departed for Siena, <q>in
the best of health,</q> according to the report of the Tuscan ambassador,
<hi rend='italic'>Niccolini</hi>, and there took up his abode with his
friend the Archbishop <hi rend='italic'>Piccolomini</hi>. After a lapse of five
months he was allowed to return to his villa at Arcetri, near
Florence, where he remained, with the exception of occasional
visits to Florence, till his death. Two of his daughters were
nuns in the nearby cloister of S. Matteo. His literary activity
was not suppressed by the surveillance of the Inquisition. His
lively and fertile mind, cut off from polemics, turned to the
completion of his researches in other directions. His lively
intercourse with friends and disciples, of whom many belonged
to various Orders, proved beneficial to him. In the year 1638
he published his <q>Dialogue on the New Sciences,</q> which he
rightly pronounced to be his best effort, and by which he became
the founder of dynamics. His productiveness continued until
he became blind.
</p>

<p>
We may say without fear of contradiction that, apart from
their theoretical error, the Roman Congregations had shown the
greatest indulgence towards one guilty of having broken his
pledge, and doubtless they would have been still more lenient
had <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, confirmed by flattering friends in his anger at
the supposed intrigues of his enemies, not himself made this
<pb n='189'/><anchor id='Pg189'/>
impossible; if he had not continued to propagate secretly his
views, verbally and in writing, which was bound to be discovered.
Considering all this, Rome's proceeding in the case appears
to be quite indulgent. Here the position was taken that
the spread of the doctrine would mean an imminent danger to
the purity of the faith. The unfortunate scientist died on January
8, 1642, at the age of seventy-eight years, fortified by the
holy Sacraments. <hi rend='italic'>Urban VIII.</hi> sent him his blessing. Undoubtedly
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> had nothing in common with the champions of that
unbelieving freedom of science, which now tries to lift him upon
its shield; notwithstanding his later bitterness he remained
to his death steadfast in his Catholic faith.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Comments on the Galileo Case.</head>

<p>
The above is a brief history of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> conviction, and of
the occurrences leading to it. An event regrettable to all, a
stumbling-block for not a few; for others a welcome event
to make the Church appear in the light of an enemy of science.
Let us now give more particulars of the merits of the case.
</p>

<p>
We have before us two decisions of Roman Tribunals: the
Index decree of 1616, announcing the rejection of the Copernican
doctrine and prohibiting books maintaining it, and the conviction
of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> in 1633 by the Congregation of the Inquisition.
It is freely admitted that these Roman Tribunals
committed an <emph>error</emph> in advocating an interpretation of the
Bible which was false in itself, and is to-day recognized as
false.
</p>

<p>
Well, <emph>does this confute the infallibility of the
Church?</emph> It does not. The matter in point is merely an
error of the Congregations, of bodies of Cardinals, who were responsible
for the transactions and decisions. The Congregations,
however, are not infallible organs. There is no Bull or
Papal decree designating the Copernican doctrine as false, much
less is there extant a decision ex cathedra. Neither in 1616
nor in 1633, nor at any other time, has the Holy See ever manifested
its intention of declaring, by a peremptory, dogmatic decision,
the new system to be against Scripture.
</p>

<pb n='190'/><anchor id='Pg190'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It was thus the general understanding of that age that in the
present case there was no irrevocable dogmatic decision given. For
instance, the Jesuit <hi rend='italic'>Riccioli</hi>, wrote not long after the decision:
<q>Inasmuch as no dogmatic decision was rendered in this case, neither
on the part of the Pope nor on the part of a Council ruled by the
Pope and acknowledged by him, it is not made, by virtue of that
decree of the Congregation, a doctrine of faith that the sun is
moving and the earth standing still, but at most it is a doctrine for
those who by reason of Holy Writ seem to be morally certain that
God has so revealed it. Yet every Catholic is bound by virtue of
obedience to conform to the decree of the Congregation, or at least
not to teach what is directly opposed to it</q> (Almagestum novum, 1651,
162). <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gassendi</hi>, and others of that time expressed themselves
similarly (<hi rend='italic'>Grisar</hi>, 165, <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). There is an interesting letter
of the Protestant philosopher <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi>, written to the Landgrave
<hi rend='italic'>Ernest of Hessia</hi>, 1688, begging him to work for the repeal of the
condemnation of the Copernican theory, because of the growing verification
of this theory: <q>If the Congregation would change its censure,
or mitigate it, as one issued hastily at a time when the proofs for
the correctness of the Copernican theory were not yet clear enough,
this step could not detract from the authority of the Congregation,
much less of the Church, because the Pope had no part in it. There
is no judicial authority which has not at times reformed its own
decisions.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But have we here not at least a <emph>wilful attack on science</emph>?
or a manifestation of the Congregation's narrow-mindedness
and ignorance, which are bound to deprive it of all respect
and confidence of sober-minded people?
</p>

<p>
This harsh judgment overlooks two points. In the first
place, the error of the judges was quite <emph>pardonable</emph>. Could
the liberal critics of to-day, who so harshly denounce the Cardinals
of the Congregation, be suddenly changed into ecclesiastical
prelates, and transferred back to the years of 1616-1633,
and placed in the chairs of the tribunal which had to decide
those delicate questions, it may be feared that, did they carry
into the decision but a part of the animosity they now show,
they would disgrace themselves and compromise the Church
even more than the judges of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> did. It is true that were
we to judge the handling of the question by the knowledge of
to-day, we might be astonished at the narrow-mindedness of
the judges, trying to uphold their untenable views against the
established results of scientific research. But it would be altogether
unhistorical to look at the matter in that way. When
<pb n='191'/><anchor id='Pg191'/>
the Copernican theory entered upon the battlefield, it was <emph>by
no means certain and demonstrated</emph>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The real arguments for the rotation of the earth were not then
known. There were no direct proofs for the progressive revolution
of the earth around the sun. <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> advanced three main arguments
for his theory. First, he advanced the argument from the phenomenon
of the tides, which, he said, could not be accounted for but by the
rotation of the earth: an argument rejected as futile even at that
time. Next he argued from certain observations of the spots on the
sun: another worthless argument, which others, like <hi rend='italic'>Scheiner</hi>, looked
upon as proof of the older theory. The third argument was that the new
theory simplified the explanation of certain celestial phenomena; but
the scope of this argument, valid though it was in the abstract, could
not be expressed or grasped at the time, especially since the corrections
of <hi rend='italic'>Tycho de Brahe</hi> had removed the greatest objections to the Ptolemaic
system. The Copernican theory could not be considered certain till
the end of the seventeenth century, after <hi rend='italic'>Newton's</hi> work on gravitation.
</p>

<p>
Then there were difficulties, the greatest of which was probably the
old idea of inertia, which at that time meant only that all bodies
tend to a state of rest; hence it seemed impossible that the earth
could ceaselessly execute two movements at the same time, around the
sun and around its own axis. This notion of inertia had not been
doubted in 1616; even <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> adhered to it. Later on <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> came
very near to the new idea of inertia: that bodies tended to retain
their state of repose or motion. But this new notion, like everything
else new, gained ground but slowly. Then it was only with great
difficulty that he could dispose of the objection that were the earth
to speed through space, as the new theory claimed, the atmosphere
would take a stormlike motion. Lastly, the philosophical objection had
to be met: the sun and other celestial bodies, as far as we can know
by observation, are moving; if they do not move, then we must admit
that we can know nothing by observation.
</p>

<p>
Thus the new doctrine was not at all proven at that time, as could
be easily shown by its opponents; although it cannot be denied that
they did not always enter into the discussion with impartiality. The
astronomer, <hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi>, testifies that <q>none of the real arguments for the
rotary motion of the earth was known at <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> time, also direct
proofs for the progressive movement of the earth around the sun
were lacking at that time</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Grisar</hi>, 30). Another famous astronomer,
<hi rend='italic'>Schiaparelli</hi>, writes: <q>In the sixteenth and seventeenth centuries the
Ptolemaic as well as the Copernican system could serve for the description
of phenomena; geometrically they were equivalent to each other
and to <hi rend='italic'>Tycho's</hi> eclectic system</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Schiaparelli</hi>, Die Vorläufer des Copernicus
im Altertum (German, 1876), 86).
</p>

<p>
Hence no direct evidence could be pleaded against the decision of
the Congregation, not even <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> had that evidence. At any rate
no judge who observed his demeanour at the trial could have suspected
<hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> of coming in conflict with his conscience by swearing off the
theory.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='192'/><anchor id='Pg192'/>

<p>
For this reason it would be wrong to call <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> a martyr
for science, because he did not suffer any martyrdom. He has
seen neither rack nor prison. But he was not a martyr chiefly
for the reason that he could not have had any scientific conviction,
apart from the fact that he did not claim any such conviction,
even denied it expressly.
</p>

<p>
No wonder, then, that the heliocentric system had considerable
opponents at that time; no wonder the opposite view was
even the prevalent one. <hi rend='italic'>A. Tanner</hi> wrote in 1626: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Ita habet
communis ac certa omnium theologorum ac philosophorum
naturalium sentia</foreign></q> (Theol. Schol. I, disp. 6, q. 4., dub. 3).
Had valid argument been brought forth there never would have
been a <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> case. In this respect a passage from a letter
of <hi rend='italic'>Bellarmin</hi> deserves attention: <q>If it could be really demonstrated
that the sun be in the centre of the world ... then
we would have to proceed quite cautiously in explaining the
apparently opposite passages in the Scriptures, we would rather
have to say that we do not understand them, than to say of
things demonstrated that they are false</q> (to <hi rend='italic'>Foscarini</hi>, April
12, 1615). The Cardinals of that time could not be expected
to anticipate the knowledge of a later period. They had to
consult the judgment of their contemporaneous savants. When
seeing the majority of them sharply rejecting the new theory
and refuting the arguments of their opponents, it is little
wonder that the Cardinals could not overcome their theological
scruples.
</p>

<p>
The scruples arose from the opinion, then prevalent, that the
Holy Scripture taught that the earth stood still and the sun
moved; that the words of the Scripture must be taken literally
till the contrary is demonstrated. The unanimous explanation
of the Christian centuries was also cited. As a matter of fact,
however, the Christian past had not taught this to be the only
true sense of the words, but at that time the words were understood
that way, because no one could arrive at any other sense
in those days.
</p>

<p>
Under these circumstances, an error was hardly avoidable,
if a decision was required. And a decision seemed to be urgent,
and this is the second point we must not overlook, if we wish
<pb n='193'/><anchor id='Pg193'/>
to judge fairly. It was a time eager for innovations, full of
anti-religious ideas. A renaissance, sidling off into false humanism,
was combating religious convictions, false notions were
invading philosophy; in addition, Protestantism was trying
to invade Italy. All this caused suspicion of any innovation
apt to endanger the faith; interpretations of the Scriptures
deviating from the accustomed sense were particularly distrusted.
The <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> quarrel happened at an inopportune time.
Indeed a sudden spread of the Copernican theory might have
been accompanied by great religious dangers. Even now, after
nearly three hundred years, the leaders of the anti-Christian
propaganda are still pointing out that the progress of natural
science has proved Holy Scripture to be erroneous, and many
are impressed by the argument; many thousands would have
been confused in those days by the sudden collapse of old
astronomical views that were connected with unclarified religious
ideas&mdash;dreading that victorious science might shatter all
religious traditions. Now, if one is convinced that the damage
to religion is to be estimated greater than any other, then
one may also have the conviction that it was better for the
nations of the new era to have their scientific progress a little
delayed, than to have their most sacred possession endangered.
Of course considerations of this kind will have no weight with
representatives of the naturalistic view of the world. Then it
can only be emphasized that a science that has no appreciation
of the supernatural character of the Catholic Church cannot be
in a position to render a fair judgment on many facts in the
history of that Church.
</p>

<p>
What we have said shows sufficiently that the condemnation
of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> was not due to any hostility to science.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The idea that the Church's attitude towards <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> and the Copernican
theory was a result of her antipathy to science is entirely
in contradiction with the character of that strenuous period. In
Catholic countries, especially in Italy, intellectual life was zealously
promoted by the Popes and their influence. It was developing and
flourishing even in the natural sciences. When reading the correspondence
of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> one must be surprised to see how popular astronomical,
physical, and mathematical studies were in the educated
circles of the period. These studies belonged to the curriculum of
a general philosophical education, and it was a matter of honour
<pb n='194'/><anchor id='Pg194'/>
for many ecclesiastical dignitaries to remain philosophers in that
sense, notwithstanding their official duties. We recall to mind the
scientific discussion carried on with <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> in Rome in 1611 and 1616,
by Cardinals <hi rend='italic'>Del Monte</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Farnese</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bonzi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bemerio</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Orsini</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Maffeo
Baberini</hi>, and by clergymen like <hi rend='italic'>Agucchi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Dini</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Campioli</hi>. Similarly
in France we meet with names like <hi rend='italic'>Mersenne</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gassendi</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi>.
And in Italy, after <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> and at his time, we meet with a long list of
eminent naturalists like <hi rend='italic'>Toricelli</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cassini</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Riccioli</hi>, and others. In
1667 <hi rend='italic'>Gemiani Montanari</hi> could write that in Italy there were continually
forming new societies of scientists. The advance in knowledge
of truth was made on safe grounds; at Naples, Rome, and
elsewhere science was enriched by a great variety of new experiences, inasmuch
as the scientists were making progress in the observation and
the investigation of nature. <hi rend='italic'>Targioni-Tozzetti</hi> writes: <q>Astronomy
with us, about the middle of the sixteenth century, was a very diligently
cultivated branch of science</q> (Galileistudien (1882) 338 f.). The
Church was by no means hostile to this newly awakened life, not even
holding aloof from it; on the contrary, it flourished especially in ecclesiastical
circles; a proof that narrow-minded disappreciation of natural
science did not prevail, and that there was a different explanation for
the <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> case.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Copernicus on the Index till 1835.</head>

<p>
And what of the fact that <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> remained on the Index
until the nineteenth century? Does it not show a rigid adherence
to old, traditional method and opposition to progress?
The fact is true: The work of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, and other Copernican
writings, remained on the Index until 1835. But it is also
true that a great deal connected with this fact is not generally
known or ignored. Let us mention here some of these facts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
To begin with, it must not be forgotten that we owe the new world
system, and with it the turning-point in astronomy, first of all to
representatives of the Catholic clergy. After the learned Bishop
<hi rend='italic'>Nicholas Oresme</hi> had expressed with fullest certainty the most important
point of the Copernican system as early as 1377 (in a manuscript
hitherto unknown, discovered a short time ago by <hi rend='italic'>Pierre
Duhem</hi> in the National Library at Paris. Cfr. Liter. Zentralblatt
(1909), page 1618), and after the learned Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Nicholaus von
Kues</hi> (d. 1474) adopted a rotary motion of the earth in his cosmic
system, it was <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, a canon of the diocese of Ermland, who
became the father of the new theory, in his work <q>De evolutionibus
orbium coelestium.</q> He published it at the urgent request of Cardinal
<hi rend='italic'>Nikolaus Schoenberg</hi>. But the most zealous promoter of his
work was Bishop <hi rend='italic'>Tiedemann Giese</hi> of Kulm. Enthusiastic over the
novel idea, he incessantly urged his friend to publish his work, took
care of its publication, and sent a copy to Pope <hi rend='italic'>Paul III.</hi>, who accepted
<pb n='195'/><anchor id='Pg195'/>
its dedication. Again, it was a prince of the Church, Bishop
<hi rend='italic'>Martin Kromer</hi>, who, in 1851, dedicated a tablet in the cathedral
at Frauenberg to <q>The Great Astronomer and Innovator of Astronomical
Science.</q> All these men knew that <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> defended his
work not as an hypothesis or as fiction, but as true. Before <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>
issued his great work, <hi rend='italic'>Clement VIII.</hi> showed a lively interest in his
system and had it explained to him by the learned <hi rend='italic'>Johann Widmannstadt</hi>
in the Vatican Gardens (<hi rend='italic'>Pastor</hi>, Gesch. der Päpste, IV, 2 (1907)
550).
</p>

<p>
The first attack against the new system, as being contrary to Holy
Writ, came not from Catholic but from Protestant circles. Among
the latter the opposition against <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> was being agitated,
while peaceful calm reigned among the former. Twelve Popes succeeded
<hi rend='italic'>Paul III.</hi>, and not one interfered with this doctrine. <hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>,
even in <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus'</hi> time, hurled his anathema against the <q>Frauenberg
Fool,</q> and six years after the publication of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus'</hi> chief
work, <hi rend='italic'>Melanchthon</hi> declared it a sin and a scandal to publish such
nonsensical opinions, contrary to the divine testimony of the Scriptures.
In fear of his religious community the Protestant publisher
<hi rend='italic'>Osiander</hi> smuggled in the spurious preface already mentioned, <q>On the
hypothesis of this work.</q> The Protestant <hi rend='italic'>Rheticus</hi>, a friend and pupil
of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, got into disfavour with <hi rend='italic'>Melanchthon</hi> and had to discontinue
his lectures at Wittenberg. The genial <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, finally, was
prosecuted by his own congregation, because of his defence of the
theory. And when on the Catholic side the Index decree of 1616 was
already beginning to be regarded as obsolete, Protestant theology
still held to the old view even up to the nineteenth century: a long list
of names could be adduced in proof.
</p>

<p>
Certainly no fair-minded person can see wilful hostility against
astronomy in this procedure. Likewise there should not be imputed
dishonourable intentions to Catholics, if in the course of history they
rendered tribute to human limitation.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But did not the decrees of 1616 and 1633 do <emph>great harm
to research</emph>? Not at all. That this was hardly the case
with <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> himself we have shown above. Soon after we
find in Italy a goodly number of distinguished scientists;
the Church in no way opposed the newly awakened life, nor
even held aloof from it. <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> himself was honoured in ecclesiastical
circles. Soon after <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> conviction the Jesuit <hi rend='italic'>Grimaldi</hi>
named a mountain on the moon after him.
</p>

<p>
Nor was there any considerable harm done to the development
of the Copernican theory. Although after <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> the occasions
were not lacking, still no further advocate of his theory was ever
up for trial. Nor was any other book on the subject prohibited.
Freedom was quietly granted more and more. In the edition
<pb n='196'/><anchor id='Pg196'/>
of the Index of 1758, the general prohibition of 1616 of
Copernican writings was withdrawn; it was an official withdrawal
from the old position. But not until 1822 were the
special prohibitions repealed, although they had long since lost
their binding force. The occasion was given by an accidental
occurrence. The Magister S. Palatii of the time intended to
deny the Imprimatur to a book on the Copernican theory, on
account of the obsolete prohibition. An appeal was made, which
brought about the formal repeal of the prohibition. Of course
there had been no hurry to revoke a decision once given. But
according to the astronomer <hi rend='italic'>Lalande's</hi> report of his interview
with the Cardinal Prefect of the Congregation of the Index, in
1765, the removal from the Index of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo's</hi> Dialogue had been
postponed only on account of extraneous difficulties. <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi>,
while in Rome, worked for a repeal of the decree. According to
Eméry, there are extant statements of <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi> vouching for the
fact that he very nearly succeeded (<hi rend='italic'>Eméry</hi>, Pensées de Leibnitz,
1, 275). The name of <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, too, was omitted in the next
edition of the Index, which appeared in 1835.
</p>

<p>
But even while the prohibition was still in force, the works
of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> were read everywhere. As early as
1619 <hi rend='italic'>John Remus</hi> wrote from Vienna to <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> that the Copernican
writings may be read by scientific men who had received
special permission, and that this was done in all Italy and in
Rome itself. Besides, it was allowed at any time to make use of
the doctrine as an hypothesis. Thus it advanced continually
nearer and nearer to the position of an established truth.
</p>

<p>
Soon after the publication of the decree, according to the
report of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, it was the general conviction in ecclesiastical
and civil circles of Austria <q>that the censure was no obstacle
to the freedom of science in the investigation of God's
work.</q> In 1685 we are assured by the Jesuit <hi rend='italic'>Kochansky</hi>, that
any Catholic was free to <q>look for an irrefutable, mathematical,
and physical demonstration of the movement of the earth.</q> It
was also known that the condemnation of the theory had been
aided by the supposition that there were no valid arguments
in support of the new theory. Hence the Congregation's decree
had in the eighteenth century for the most part lost its force.
<pb n='197'/><anchor id='Pg197'/>
The Jesuit <hi rend='italic'>Boscovich</hi>, a celebrated physicist and astronomer,
wrote in 1755: <q>In consequence of the extraordinary arguments
offered by the consideration of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler's</hi> laws, astronomers
no longer look upon his theory as a mere hypothesis, but as an
established truth</q> (Grisar, 347, 350).
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
Thus in the light of history the condemnation of the
Copernican theory appears quite differently from the picture
presented by the superficial accusation that Rome up to
the nineteenth century condemned this theory. There is no
trace of callousness and oppression, but only submission to
legitimate authority, in so far and as long as one deemed himself
obliged. It was a science enlightened by Christianity,
which, in questions not yet clearly decided, laid down upon
the altar of the Giver of all wisdom the tribute of humble
submission, for the sake of higher interests.
</p>

<p>
We shall have to class with <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> the uncertainty of
human judgments and tribunals among the <q>troubles of human
life,</q> and say with him: <q>It is also a misery that the judge
is subject to the necessity of not knowing many things, but to
the wise man it is not a fault</q> (De Civ. Dei, IX, 6). May we
therefore infer that the teaching authority is an evil? Were that
true, we should have to abolish the authority of the state and of
parents, because they also make mistakes. We should have to
conclude that there had better be no authority at all on earth.
Where men live and rule, mistakes will certainly be made.
The physician makes mistakes in his important office, yet
patients return to him with confidence. Every pedagogue,
every professor, has made mistakes, yet they still command respect.
The state government is subject to mistakes, yet none
but the anarchist will say that it must therefore be abolished.
<q>That the judge is subject to the necessity of not knowing
many things, is a misery, but to the wise man not a fault.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='198'/><anchor id='Pg198'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter V. The Witnesses of the Incompatibility
Of Science And Faith.</head>

<div>
<head>The Objection.</head>

<p>
We shall not go wrong in presuming that the reader, who
has patiently followed our deductions, has had for some
time in his mind the question: How about the representatives
of scientific research themselves? Do not a large majority of
them, perhaps virtually all, stand alien and repellant to Christian
faith and its fundamental truths? We do not refer to our
modern philosophers, for of them it might be said that their
researches yield questionable speculations of individualistic
stamp, rather than exact results. But there are the representatives
of the more exact sciences, especially of the most exact of all,
natural science. They may be considered the legitimate representatives
of modern science, since their results are the most accurate,
their methods the most strictly scientific; and are they
not, every one of them, opposed to Christian faith, especially to its
fundamental dogma? Is not <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> right when he states in the
final summary of his <q>Welträtsel,</q> in which he so strongly insists
on the incompatibility of religion and natural science: <q>I
am supported by the accord of nearly all modern naturalists who
have the courage to express their convictions</q>? Is it not true
that <hi rend='italic'>A. von Humboldt</hi> is considered the prince of German naturalists?
and yet in his voluminous <q><hi rend='italic'>Kosmos</hi></q> he not once mentions
the name of God? Have not, with few exceptions, German
naturalists, under <hi rend='italic'>Humboldt's</hi> influence, turned against Christianity?
(<hi rend='italic'>W. Menzel</hi>, Die letzten hundertzwanzig Jahre der
Weltgeschichte, VI, 1860, p. 70; cfr. <hi rend='italic'>Pohle</hi>, P. Angelo Secchi,
1904, p. 6). Here indeed the antagonism between true scientific
spirit and the faith seems to take shape in tangible reality, and
to invalidate every argument to the contrary.
</p>

<pb n='199'/><anchor id='Pg199'/>

<p>
Thus runs the speech that is ever recurring in the literature
of the day, in newspapers and magazines no less than in books.
And this speech makes an impression on its hearers. Indeed, why
should it not? After describing how these heroes of science in
recent times marched on triumphantly from victory to victory,
how they renewed the face of the earth, and became the pioneers
of human progress, how can they fail to make a deep impression
if in the same breath they state that these discoverers of truth
have, almost to a man, broken with the ancient teachings of the
Christian religion?
</p>

<p>
Without doubt the suggestive effect of such speculation must
be very considerable with those who lack sufficient historical
knowledge. The case is different with those better acquainted
with the history of the natural sciences. They know that it is
not true to state that the leading natural scientists, for the most
part, or even unanimously, have rejected and denied Christian
religion, that it is a <emph>lie</emph> and a falsification of history.
</p>

<p>
Let us illustrate it briefly. We do not, of course, mean to say,
that <emph>if</emph> it were true that all the leading naturalists were infidels,
the inference would necessarily follow that Christianity is untenable,
and incompatible with science. Not at all. First of all,
natural scientists who oppose Christianity could hardly ever come
forward in the capacity of experts in this matter. For by venturing
the assertion that world-matter and world-force are eternal
and uncreated, that they develop by force of natural
causality, by unending evolution, and not by the power and
direction of an intelligent cause, they leave their own province
and trespass on the domain of philosophy. These and similar
questions are not solved by natural science research, by experiment,
observation, or calculation, but are the subjects of philosophical
speculation. Atheism, materialism, the denial of the
soul's immortality or of eternal destination, all these are philosophical
matters, and a natural science theory of the world
is a misconception about as absurd as a Swiss England or a
Bavarian Spain.
</p>

<p>
As it is impossible to review here all scientists of the past
centuries, to probe their bent of mind, we shall restrict ourselves
in the following to scientists of the first rank, for to
<pb n='200'/><anchor id='Pg200'/>
them the assertion above mentioned must chiefly refer. First of
all, they were possessed of that spirit of scientific research claimed
to be incompatible with the faith; and they, more than others,
should have been conscious of this contradiction. It is plain
that if they did not know anything of the claimed antagonism
between the theories of evolution and of creation, between
physical facts and spirituality of soul, between natural law and
miracles; if it be shown that many of them were actually orthodox
Christians, believing in the supernatural and yet enthusiastic
friends of science, fathoming the laws of nature and yet
unshaken in their faith, then the fact that inferior minds talk
of a contradiction unknown to these great ones can no longer
make much of an impression.
</p>

<p>
Therefore let us look over the long list of great scholars
of the last centuries, those great men to whom we owe knowledge
and discoveries that are our joy to this very day. Among them
we shall find many who, in their life and thought, have plainly
confessed themselves faithful Christians; we shall find that
others were at least the opponents of atheism and materialism,
that they clung to the fundamental truths of the Christian faith,
and that is a matter of moment when the antagonism between
natural science and faith is under discussion.
</p>

<p>
We shall not go back to the ancient representatives of natural
science, men like <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Archimedes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Albert the
Great</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Roger Bacon</hi>, and others of past ages, partly because
there is no doubt about the religious views of those men, partly
because research at their time was imperfect. We begin at the
rise of modern natural science.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Old Masters.</head>

<p>
At the threshold of modern natural science there stands the
man who solved the riddle that had puzzled centuries before
him, the father of modern astronomy, <hi rend='italic'>Nikolaus Copernicus</hi>.
He had studied at the universities of Cracow, Bologna, Ferrara,
and Padua, and while he was one of the foremost historians
of his time, it was astronomy that had engaged his enthusiastic
devotion from his youth. He was a Catholic priest, a Canon
<pb n='201'/><anchor id='Pg201'/>
of Frauenberg. <q>If recent representatives of the Roman
Church,</q> so writes the Protestant theologian, <hi rend='italic'>O. Zoeckler</hi>,
<q>praise this Frauenberg Canon as a faithful son of their Church,
this fact must be granted by Protestants, despite the frankness
with which he opposed the Aristotelian and Ptolemaic theories
taught by the scholastics, and despite his friendship with the
Protestant <hi rend='italic'>Rheticus</hi></q> (Gottes Zeugen im Reiche der Natur,
1906, p. 82). <hi rend='italic'>George Joachim</hi>, a native of Feldkirch, surnamed
<hi rend='italic'>Rheticus</hi>, and a Protestant professor at Wittenberg, came to
<hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> at Frauenberg, and was cordially received. His
praise for <q>his teacher</q> is unreserved. He speaks in the same
admiring terms of <hi rend='italic'>Tiedemann Giese</hi>, in those days Bishop of
Kulm.
</p>

<p>
For nearly forty years <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> sat in the modest observatory
which he had erected at Frauenberg, studying and
collecting the material for his book. Even after all this time
this deliberate scholar, despite the urging of his friends, especially
Bishop <hi rend='italic'>Tiedemann Giese</hi> and Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Schoenberg</hi>, Archbishop
of Capua, hesitated for ten years longer before publishing
his discoveries. The work was entitled <hi rend='italic'>De revolutionibus
orbium caelestium, libri VI</hi>, and was dedicated to Pope <hi rend='italic'>Paul
III.</hi> The author himself could enjoy his achievement but very
little. The first copy sent by the printer reached <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>
on his deathbed, and a few hours later he breathed his last,
on May 24, 1543.
</p>

<p>
In the introduction to his work this devout Christian scientist
wrote: <q>Who would not be urged by the intimate intercourse
with the work of His hands to the contemplation of the
Most High, and to the admiration for the Omnipotent Architect
of the universe, in whom is the highest happiness, and in whom
is the perfection of all that is good?</q>
</p>

<p>
Without <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> there could have been no <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, without
<hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> no <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>. These three men, in the words of a recent
astronomer, belong inseparably together, they support and supplement
one another. It might be fittingly asked, after which
of these three the celestial system should be named; and were
it possible to ask these three men for their opinion in this
matter, they would probably all give the answer that has been
<pb n='202'/><anchor id='Pg202'/>
ascribed to one or the other of them: Not my system, but
God's Order. Like <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, so <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> were
profoundly religious men.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Johann Kepler</hi>, born of Protestant parents in Württemberg
in 1571, was raised a Lutheran. In 1594 he was appointed
professor of mathematics at a school in Graz, and after that
he dwelt for the most time in Austria, which country became
his second home. From Graz he was called to Prague to be
mathematician at the imperial court, and from there to Linz
to be professor at the college there. His last years were passed
at Sagan and Ratisbon, where he died in 1630. Even after
having left Austria he gratefully remembered the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>clementia
austriaca</foreign> and the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>favor archiducalis</foreign>. <hi rend='italic'>Kepler's</hi> astronomical
achievements are known to everybody, especially his laws of
the planets. With an untiring spirit of research he combined
beautiful traits of character, cheerfulness, kindness, and modesty,
but chiefly a profoundly religious mind. However, he was in
difficult circumstances as far as his religious life was concerned.
Quite early he came in conflict with the religious authorities of
his confession, particularly for the reason that they considered
<hi rend='italic'>Kepler's</hi> Copernican views as against the Bible, a fact which the
learned astronomer could not see. There were also other differences.
The conflict became more and more aggravated. It
cannot be denied that the Lutheran Church-authorities proceeded
against <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> with a lack of consideration never shown
by Rome against men like <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> was expelled from the
Lutheran Church, and despite his efforts to be reinstated the
ban was never lifted.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Like <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, so was his predecessor at the Catholic court of Prague,
the Danish astronomer <hi rend='italic'>Tycho Brahe</hi> (died 1601), a devout Protestant,
but the trials of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> were spared him. His erroneous idea that
the Copernican system conflicted with Holy Writ kept him from subscribing
to it: it led him to devise a system midway between <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>
and <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi>. His religious sentiment is evidenced by a passage
from a letter of his, written at his father's death, <q>Although there
are many consolations for me, of a religious nature based on Holy
Writ, and of a philosophical kind drawn from the contemplation of the
fate of all men and of the inconstancy of everything under the moon,
it is a special comfort for me that my father departed so sweetly and
piously from this valley of misery to the heavenly eternal home, where,
according to <hi rend='italic'>St. Paul</hi>, we shall find a lasting abode.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='203'/><anchor id='Pg203'/>

<p>
But let us return to <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>. There is evidence that at various
times in his life he wavered between his Lutheran confession
and the Catholic faith, but that is as far as he went. He was
of the opinion that the fundamental truths of both were in
accord, and he would not presume to judge of the differences;
he had taken a view-point of his own, from which he could not
be made to recede. On the other hand, he was shocked when
his fellow-Lutherans in Styria were on two occasions severely
dealt with, although he personally had been treated with especial
consideration. Otherwise his opinions on Catholic matters and
the <q>wisdom</q> of the Catholic Church were eminently fair; he
censured his co-religionists for their invidious attacks on Rome,
and for their hesitancy in adopting the Gregorian reform of
the calendar. He had friendly relation with many a Catholic
scientist, was in correspondence with many Jesuits, was even
frequently their guest, receiving stimulus, commendation, and
scientific communications from them.
</p>

<p>
To <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi> the study of astronomy became largely a prayer;
the finest of his scientific works he was wont to conclude with
the doxology of the Psalmist, <q>Great is our Lord, and great is
His power, and of His wisdom there is no number: praise Him
ye Heavens; praise ye Him, O Sun, and Moon, ye Stars and
light, and praise Him in your language. Thou, too, praise Him,
O soul of mine, thy Lord, thy Creator, as long as it is granted
to thee</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Harmonices Mundi</hi>, v. 9). His name and work is
commemorated in the Keplerbund in Germany, which aims at
the promotion of scientific knowledge in the sense of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>,
in opposition to the misuse of natural science for purposes of
materialism and atheism.
</p>

<p>
The work, begun so happily by <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, was
completed by the great Englishman, <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> (died 1727). It
was he who in his immortal work, <hi rend='italic'>Philosophiae naturalis principia
mathematica</hi>, laid bare the law of the universe, which
compels the heavenly bodies to revolve about one another.
Therewith the laws of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, and consequently the Copernican
hypothesis, became established. When, in 1727, this scientist, at
the age of eighty-five, died, his mortal remains were entombed in
Westminster Abbey, the Pantheon of the British nation. Lofty
<pb n='204'/><anchor id='Pg204'/>
science and the reverent worship of his Creator were combined
in the noble mind of this great Briton. In an appendix to his
master-work, referred to above, he cited his proofs for the existence
of God, and stated that <q>the entire order, as to space
and time of all things existing, must have necessarily proceeded
from the conception and will of an existing Being,</q>
that <q>the admirable arrangement of sun, planets, and comets
could only emanate from the decree and the design of an All-wise
and Omnipotent Being,</q> that <q>we admire Him for His
perfections, we adore and worship Him as the ruler of the
world, we, the servants of the great Sovereign of the Universe.</q>
According to <hi rend='italic'>Voltaire</hi>, it was stated by <hi rend='italic'>Newton's</hi> disciple, <hi rend='italic'>Clarke</hi>,
that his master invariably pronounced the name of God with
reverent attitude and expression.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Inseparably connected with the history of the Copernican system
there is the name, which recalls harsh accusations and painful memories,
the name of <hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>. That he had nothing in common with the
aims of those who have broken with faith and Christianity, nor with
that hostility against his Church for which his name is so often misused,
has been made evident by what we have said on another page
(see page 189). Not only during his early life was his religious
turn of mind evidenced, but also later on and up to the end of his life
he continued to observe faithfully the duties of his religion.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
One of the greatest physicists of recent times was <hi rend='italic'>Christian
Huygens</hi>, who died in 1695 at his native city, The Hague. To
him we owe the epoch-making discovery of the undulation of
light, while <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> had held light to be a matter of emission.
But while <hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi> advanced over <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> in this respect, he
paid tribute to human limitation by remaining prejudiced
against <hi rend='italic'>Newton's</hi> theory of gravitation, which he rejected.
<hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi> was a believing Christian.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In his philosophic dissertation <q>Kosmotheoros,</q> a posthumous work,
he says in regard to the possibility of the celestial bodies being inhabited:
<q>How could the investigator look up to God, the Creator of
all these great worlds, otherwise but in the spirit of deepest reverence?
Here it will be possible for us to find manifold proofs to demonstrate
His providence and wonderful wisdom; likewise will our contemplation
contend against those who are spreading false opinions, such as attributing
the origin of the earth to the accidental union of atoms, or of
the earth being without a beginning and without a creator.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='205'/><anchor id='Pg205'/>

<p>
Religious fervour is still more pronounced in <hi rend='italic'>Huygens'</hi> contemporary,
<hi rend='italic'>Robert Boyle</hi> (died 1692), a son of Ireland. While
he had made considerable achievements in physics, his chief
fame lies in chemistry: he inaugurated the period in which
chemistry became gradually an independent science. Although
working in a different field of research, he is similar to <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>
in many respects: like <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi>, his love of scientific
studies induced him to remain unmarried, like <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> he
found his last resting place in Westminster Abbey, but chiefly
he is like <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi> because of his pious, religious mind. He was
much occupied with theological studies, and in them the demonstration
from nature of the existence of God, and the author's
reverence for the Scriptures are most conspicuous: <q>In relation
to the Bible,</q> he writes, <q>all the books of men, even the most
learned, are like the planets that receive their light and brightness
from the sun.</q> On his deathbed he made a foundation
for apologetic lectures: the Boyle-lectures are held to this very
day.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We shall have to pass by others. We might point to the English
philosopher and statesman, <hi rend='italic'>Francis Bacon</hi> of Verulam (died 1626),
who won his place in the history of natural science by his urging of
the empiric method; we might point to <hi rend='italic'>W. Harvey</hi> (died 1658), the
discoverer of the blood-circulation, a man of earnest and simple piety;
we might mention the pious <hi rend='italic'>Albrecht von Haller</hi> (died 1777), <hi rend='italic'>J. Bernouilli</hi>
(died 1728) the co-inventor of integral calculus, the man of
whom his great disciple <hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi> relates that this <hi rend='italic'>Bernouilli</hi>, co-inventor
of the most difficult of all calculations, this great mathematician, expressed
regret in his old age that he had devoted so many years to
science, and only few hours to religion, and that on his deathbed he
admonished those around him to adhere to the Word of God because
that alone is the word of life.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We shall name but one more, a son of northern Sweden, the
famous botanist, <hi rend='italic'>Karl Linné</hi> (died 1778). He, too, found God
in the living nature which he studied so diligently.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In commenting on his <hi rend='italic'>Systema naturae</hi> he writes: <q>Man, know
thyself; in theological aspect, that thou art created with an immortal
soul, after the image of God; in moral aspect, that thou alone art
blessed with a rational soul for the praise of thy sublime Creator. I
ask, why did God put man equipped thus in sense and spirit on this
earth, where he perceives this wonderfully ordered nature? For what,
but to praise and admire the invisible Master-builder for His magnificent
work.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='206'/><anchor id='Pg206'/>

<p>
These are the great masters and reformers of recent natural
science, the men who opened up the paths which natural science
of the present day is still pursuing; most of these savants
were of a Christian mind, many of them even pious. There
were but few indifferent or irreligious, such as <hi rend='italic'>E. Halley</hi> (died
1742), who computed the cycle of the comet since named after
him, and <hi rend='italic'>G. de Buffon</hi> (died 1788): but they are a small
minority. The period of highest achievement in modern natural
science bears the stamp of religion; indeed, to a great extent it
bears the halo of devotion and fervour. An incompatibility of
research and faith, a solidarity of science and anti-Christian
tendency, was never known to the mind of these great masters.
</p>

<p>
<q>Any one who has grasped even the elements of natural
science, the unity of natural forces and their rigid conformity
to laws, becomes a monist if he has the faculty for clear reasoning,
and as to the others, there is no help for them anyway</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>L. Plate</hi>, Ultramontane Weltanschauung und moderne Lebenskunde,
1907, 11). This sort of argument is shouted at us in
manifold variations. How does that statement look in the light
of history? Men like <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Linné</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Boyle</hi>,
thus knew nothing of the elements of natural science, nothing of
the conformity to laws of natural forces: because they were
neither monists nor atheists, but worshippers of the Creator
of heaven and earth! A more painful contrast cannot be imagined
than to see these great masters and pioneers rated as lesser
minds, ignorant of real natural science, by those who trail far
behind them and who are seeking their footsteps. The religious
conviction of the natural scientists of a past age is sufficient
proof that, not the research in natural science, but other causes
lead minds to infidelity.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Modern Times.</head>

<p>
We turn to the nineteenth century. Does the picture perhaps
change essentially in the century that has shown its children so
much progress, that has disclosed so many secrets of nature,
but has also taught irreligion to thousands of men? Does it
become true now that natural science and Christian fundamental
<pb n='207'/><anchor id='Pg207'/>
truths are opposed to each other in hostile attitude? Claims to
this effect are not lacking. In fact, the number of those who
refuse assent to the Christian religion is increasing. But even
at this time we do not find such to be the majority of eminent
scientists, and our inquiry is about eminent scientists, those who
make the science of a period, not those who can hardly expect
to have their names known by posterity. A considerable number,
indeed the majority, of the master minds of natural science,
even in the nineteenth century, reject materialism and atheism,
and not infrequently they are pious Christians; another proof
that just upon the deeper and more serious minds religion exercises
a stronger power of attraction.
</p>

<p>
Let us commence with the astronomers.
</p>

<p>
<q>The sciences and their true representatives,</q> so states the
renowned <hi rend='italic'>Mädler</hi> of Dorpat, <q>do not deserve the reproaches and
imputations heaped upon them from a certain side, that they
would estrange man from God, even turn him into an atheist
... we hope to show of astronomy especially that just the contrary
is taking place</q> (Reden und Abhandlungen über Gegenstände
der Himmelskunde, 1870, 326).
</p>

<p>
The greatest astronomer of the nineteenth century, and one
of the greatest discoverers of all ages, was undoubtedly <hi rend='italic'>William
Herschel</hi> (died 1822). His son <hi rend='italic'>John Herschel</hi> (died 1871)
became his <q>worthy successor, almost his peer, who won a fame
nearly equal to that of the inherited name</q> (<hi rend='italic'>R. Wolf</hi>,
Geschichte der Astronomie, 1877, 505). While not hostile to
religion, the father had been so engrossed in his restless research,
that religion received little attention, but religious
thought and sentiment played a prominent part in the son.
Time and again he opposed with zeal the materialistic-atheistic
explanation of the universe. <q>Nothing is more unfounded than
the objection made by some well-meaning but undiscerning persons,
that the study of natural science induces a doubt of religion
and of the immortality of the soul. Be assured that its
logical effect upon any well-ordered mind must be just the
opposite</q> (Preliminary Discourse on the Study of Natural
Philosophy, 1830, 7).
</p>

<p>
It was <hi rend='italic'>Leverrier</hi> (died 1877), Director of the Paris Observatory,
<pb n='208'/><anchor id='Pg208'/>
who by calculations ascertained the existence and exact
position of the remotest planet Neptune even before it was
discovered. When eventually <hi rend='italic'>Galle</hi> of Berlin really found the
planet in the position indicated, <hi rend='italic'>Leverrier's</hi> name became
famous. But greater still were the achievements of this indefatigable
investigator in respect to the known planets. When
he presented to the French Academy the final part of his great
work, the calculations of Jupiter and Saturnus, he said: <q>During
our long labours, which it took us thirty-five years to complete,
we needed the support obtained by the contemplation of
one of the grandest works of creation, and by the thought
that it strengthened in us the imperishable truths of a spiritualistic
(<hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, non-materialistic) philosophy.</q> He was an orthodox
Catholic, known as a Clerical. A newspaper complained of him
that <q>Under the empire he was a clerical Senator, concerned
with the interests of the altar no less than with those of the
throne</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kneller</hi>, Das Christenthum und die Vertreter der
neueren Naturwissenschaft, 1904, 96. In the following pages
we have made frequent use of the material gathered in this
sterling work. See also <hi rend='italic'>James J. Walsh</hi>, Makers of Modern
Medicine (1907); and the same author's Catholic Churchmen
in Science, I (1909), II (1910)).
</p>

<p>
One year after the death of <hi rend='italic'>Leverrier</hi> another scientist of
the first rank died. It was <hi rend='italic'>A. Secchi</hi> (died 1878). Member of
nearly all the scientific academies of the world, he was not only
a faithful Christian, but also a priest: for forty-five years, and
until his death, he wore the garb of the Society of Jesus. As an
astronomer he has been named, not without good cause, the father
of astrophysics: he ascertained the chemical composition of
about 4,000 stars and classified them into what is known as
<hi rend='italic'>Secchi's</hi> four types of stars. As a physicist he wrote an important
work on The Unity of Natural Forces. He was also an
eminent meteorologist.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
At the second International Exposition at Paris his meteorograph
was quite a feature. The <hi rend='italic'>Kölnische Zeitung</hi> wrote, on March 2, 1878:
<q>Visitors of the Italian Exhibition, at the second World's Fair in
Paris, could see the marvellous instrument which does the work of
ten observers and surpasses them in accuracy. At the same time they
<pb n='209'/><anchor id='Pg209'/>
could obtain all needed information about details and scope of the
meteorograph from the exhibitor himself; for <hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi> was there daily,
devoting several hours to answering questions in any of the civilized
languages of Europe. It is peculiarly interesting to observe the silent
movement of the hands working day and night like registrars of the
natural forces, and recording for every quarter of an hour with the
utmost accuracy all changes in temperature, in humidity, every variance
of the wind, any movement of the mercury in the barometer.
Even the force of the wind and the time of rain is registered by this
wonderful instrument.</q> The inventor, out of 40,000 art exhibitors,
was awarded the great golden medal. He also received the insignia
of an officer of the French Legion of Honor, while the Emperor of
Brazil appointed him an officer of the <q>Golden Rose.</q>
</p>

<p>
The French scientist <hi rend='italic'>Moigno</hi> writes of <hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi>: <q><hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi> was very
pious, and as a worker he knew no limits. He was ever ready to
evolve new scientific plans, to enter into new and long campaigns of
observation. The mere list of his 800 works reveals him as one of the
most intrepid workers of our century. And let this be considered:
every one of these writings, no matter how brief, was the result of
subtle and difficult researches and observations. And after devoting
the day to arduous writing, he passed the night searching the skies</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Pohle</hi>, P. Angelo Secchi, 1904, 191).
</p>

<p>
In the nineteenth century, too, astronomy has not failed in its
mission of leading to God. A long list could be named of believing
astronomers of great achievements. For instance, the Roman astronomer
<hi rend='italic'>Respighi</hi> (died 1889), a resolute Catholic. And <hi rend='italic'>Lamont</hi>, Director
of the Observatory of Munich, whose Catholic orthodoxy was generally
known. <hi rend='italic'>Heis</hi> (died 1877) likewise was a zealous Catholic: when he
had finished his map of the sky, after 27 years of hard work, he sent
one of the first copies to <hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi> The astronomers <hi rend='italic'>Bessel</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Olbers</hi>
speak in their letters of God, of the hereafter and Providence, in a way
that has nothing in common with materialism.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Secchi</hi> was not the only priest and monk among the astronomers of
the nineteenth century. The very first day of the century was made
notable by the astronomical achievement of a monk. <hi rend='italic'>Joseph Piazzi</hi>,
a member of the Theatine order (died 1826), discovered on that day
the first asteroid, Ceres. The great mathematician <hi rend='italic'>Gauss</hi> named his
first born son Joseph, in <hi rend='italic'>Piazzi's</hi> honor.
</p>

<p>
It is, indeed, a remarkable fact, testifying strongly against the
incompatibility of natural science and faith, that just the Catholic
clergy, the prominent representatives of religion and faith, have contributed
a large contingent to the number of natural scientists.
<hi rend='italic'>Poggendorf's</hi> Biographical Dictionary of the Exact Sciences contains,
down to 1863, according to preface and recapitulation, the names and
biographical sketches of 8,847 natural scientists. Of these, 862 are
Catholic priests, amounting to 9.8 per cent. To appreciate these 10
per cent it must be taken into account that most of them were not
connected with natural science by their position, but only through
their personal interest, and most of them were engaged in other
duties.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='210'/><anchor id='Pg210'/>

<p>
Mathematics, although not natural science proper, is inseparably
connected with it. For this reason we may extend our
consideration to mathematicians. We only point to the three
greatest, <hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gauss</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Cauchy</hi>, and all three were religious
men. <hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi> (died 1783 at Petersburg) has no peer in the recent
history of science in prolific activity: ten times he was awarded
the prize by the Paris Academy of Sciences. <hi rend='italic'>Cantor</hi> says of
him: <q>Like most great mathematicians, <hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi> was profoundly
religious, though without bigotry. He personally conducted
every evening the private devotions at his home, and one of the
few polemical books he wrote was a defence of revelation against
the objections of free-thinkers.</q> Its publication at Berlin in
1747, in close proximity of the court of <hi rend='italic'>Frederick the Great</hi>, presupposed
a certain moral courage. In this book he refers to
the difficulties found in all sciences, even in geometry, adding:
<q>By what right then can the free-thinkers demand of us to
reject at once Holy Writ in its entirety, because of some difficulties
which frequently are not even so important as those
complained of in geometry?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Gauss</hi> (died 1855) is perhaps
the greatest mathematician of all times. It sounds incredible,
yet it is well attested, that as a child of three years, when in
the workshop of his father, a plain mechanic, he was able to
correct the father if he made a mistake in figuring out the
wages paid to his journeymen. His biographer, <hi rend='italic'>Waltershausen</hi>,
says of him: <q>The conviction of a personal existence after
death, the firm belief in an ultimate Ruler of things, in an
eternal, just, all-wise and all-powerful God, formed the foundation
of his religious life, which, with his unsurpassed scientific
researches, resolved itself into a perfect harmony.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cauchy</hi>
(died 1857) was a man of most extraordinary genius, whose
creative genius knew how to discover new paths everywhere, and
almost at every weekly meeting of the Paris Academy <hi rend='italic'>Cauchy</hi>
had something new to offer. In addition he was a dutiful Catholic,
and a member of St. Vincent's Society. When, shortly before
the February revolution, an onslaught upon the Jesuit
schools was made, he defended them in two pamphlets.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
One of them contains the following confession of faith: <q>I am a
Christian, that is, I believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, with <hi rend='italic'>Tycho
<pb n='211'/><anchor id='Pg211'/>
Brahe</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fermat</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pascal</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Grimaldi</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Guldin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Boscovich</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gerdil</hi>; with all great astronomers,
all great physicists, all great mathematicians of past centuries. I
am also a Catholic, with the majority of them, and if asked for my
reasons, I would enumerate them readily. By them it would be made
clear that my conviction is not the result of inherited prejudices, but
of profound inquiry. I am a sincere Catholic, as <hi rend='italic'>Corneille</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Racine</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>La Bruyère</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bossuet</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bourdaloue</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fénelon</hi> were, and such as were and
still are a large portion of the most eminent men of our times, among
them those who have achieved most in the exact sciences, in philosophy
and literature, and who have most prominently adorned our Academy</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Valson</hi>, Vie de Cauchy, I, 173). When near death, and told that
the priest would bring the Holy Sacrament, he ordered the finest
flowers of his garden used in the reception of the Lord.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We now come to the physicists. To begin with the most
prominent representatives of the science of optics, which was
developed especially during the first half of the century, there
are to be named chiefly <hi rend='italic'>Fresnel</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Frauenhofer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fizeau</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Foucault</hi>.
<hi rend='italic'>A. Fresnel</hi> (died 1827), the originator of the modern theory of
light, clung to his conviction of the spirituality and immortality
of the soul. <hi rend='italic'>Frauenhofer</hi> (died 1826) showed himself to be a
man of refinement and of kindness, which only occasionally was
disturbed by natural irritability: he was much devoted to his
religion, so that even his guests while at his house had to observe
the abstinence prescribed by the Church; this was quite
significant, considering the indifference of his times in this
respect. <hi rend='italic'>Fizeau</hi> (died 1896), too, was a staunch Catholic, who
fearlessly testified to his belief, even before the Paris Academy.
Though his work was of the first rank, France's chief marks of
honour passed him by, and little notice was even given to his
death. A significant fact. <q>These circumstances,</q> so writes
<hi rend='italic'>Kneller</hi>, <q>induced us to inquire for particulars; and through
the services of friends we obtained information in Paris from
most reliable source that <hi rend='italic'>Fizeau</hi> was a faithful Christian, who
fulfilled his religious duties. For this very reason his name had
been stricken, at the Centenary of the Academy, from the list of
candidates for the cross of the legion of honor, notwithstanding
the fact that, on the strength of his scientific achievement, he
should long have been Commander and even Grand Officer of this
order.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Cornu</hi> was the only one to protest against this slight.
<hi rend='italic'>Foucault</hi> (died 1868) had, in the time of his restless scientific
<pb n='212'/><anchor id='Pg212'/>
work, taken an unsympathetic attitude towards the Catholic
religion. In his last illness he returned, step by step, to his
Creator and Redeemer, in whom he found his comfort, and he
breathed his last in peace with God and the Church.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Foucault's</hi> great countryman, <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> (died 1836), the celebrated
investigator in the fields of electricity, was also estranged
from the Christian religion, but, after passing through torturing
doubts, he regained undisturbed possession of his Catholic
faith, and was a pious Christian at the time of his brilliant
discoveries. He had frequent intercourse with <hi rend='italic'>A. F. Ozanam</hi>,
and the discussion almost without exception turned to God.
Then <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> would cover his forehead with his hands, exclaiming:
<q>How great God is! Ozanam! how great God is, and our
knowledge is as nothing.</q> <q>This venerable head,</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ozanam</hi>
relates of his friend, <q>covered with honours and full of knowledge,
bowed down before the mysteries of the faith; he knelt at
the same altars where before him <hi rend='italic'>Descartes</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Pascal</hi> worshipped
humbly, beside the poor widow and the small child, who
perhaps were less humble than he</q> (<hi rend='italic'>A. F. Ozanam</hi>, Oeuvres
Complètes, X, 37, and VIII, 89). As he was dying, and <hi rend='italic'>M.
Deschamps</hi>, director of the college of Marseille, began to read
aloud some passages from the <q>Imitation of Christ,</q> the dying
man remarked that he knew the book by heart.
</p>

<p>
Another great discoverer in the domain of electricity, who
had preceded <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi>, was <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> (died 1827). Like his great
fellow countryman, <hi rend='italic'>Galvani</hi> (died 1798), who did not disdain to
be a member of the third order of St. Francis, <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> was a
staunch Catholic; every day he recited the rosary.
</p>

<p>
At Como, his home, he was daily seen to go to holy Mass
and, on holidays, to the Sacraments. Those who passed his
house on Saturdays saw a small lamp burning before the picture
of the Blessed Virgin Mary over his door. If the servant forgot
to light the lamp, <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> did it himself. On Feast days, when
visiting the parish church, the great electrician could be seen
among the children, explaining the catechism to them.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A friend of <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi>, the Canon <hi rend='italic'>Giacomo Ciceri</hi>, once was endeavoring
to convert a dying man, who, however, refused to hear him, on the
ground that whereas religion might be good for the common people,
<pb n='213'/><anchor id='Pg213'/>
scientists did not need it, and he reckoned himself among them. <hi rend='italic'>Ciceri</hi>
thereupon reminded him of <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi>. This made an impression upon the
dying man, who declared that if <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> be seriously religious, and not
only as a matter of convention, he would consent to receive the
Sacraments. The Canon then requested <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> to write a few lines.
<hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> replied as follows: <q rend='pre'>I do not understand how anybody can doubt
my sincerity and constancy in the religion which I profess, and which
is that of Catholic, Apostolic, Roman Church, wherein I was born and
raised, and which I have professed all my life, inwardly and outwardly....
Should any misdemeanor on my part have prompted any
one to suspect me of unbelief, then I will declare, for the purpose of
making reparation ... that I always have believed this Holy Catholic
religion to be the only true and infallible one, and that I still think
so, and I thank our dear Lord incessantly for having given me this
belief, in which to live and to die is my resolution, in the firm hope
of gaining the eternal life. It is true, I acknowledge this belief to be a
gift of God, a supernatural belief; yet, I have not neglected human
means to fortify myself in this belief, and to drive away all doubts
that may arise to tempt me. For this reason, I have studied the faith
diligently in its foundations, by reading apologetic and controversial
writings, weighing the reasons for and against; a way, which supplies
the strongest proof, and makes it most credible for the human reason
to such a degree, that any noble mind, not perverted by sins and
passions, cannot help embracing and loving it. I wish this profession,
for which I was asked and which I willingly make, written and signed
by my own hand, to be shown at will to any one, because I am not
ashamed of the Gospel. May my writing bear good fruit.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Alexander Volta.</hi>
</p>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='smallcaps'>Milan</hi>, January 6th, 1815.</l>
<l><q rend='post'>(<hi rend='italic'>C. Grandi</hi>, Alessandro Volta, 1899, 575.)</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
He who, for the first time, is made aware of the religious confession
of the greatest natural scientists may perhaps be astonished.
Hitherto, he had heard little of the Christian mind of
these men, but a great deal about their alleged indifference for
religion, and about their materialism and atheism. Now, suddenly,
he sees a large number of them to be the enemies of
atheism, many, indeed, to be zealous Christians.
</p>

<p>
This is due to the biographers: they dwell largely on the
scientific achievement of a man, likewise on his human qualities,
but his religion is often not mentioned at all. When, in 1888,
a monument was erected to <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> in his native city, Lyons,
not a word in the speeches referred to the fact that he was a
faithful Catholic. Nay, more; on one of the books seen on his
monument is chiselled in bold letters the word <q>Encyclopédie.</q>
<pb n='214'/><anchor id='Pg214'/>
Those unaware of the facts would infer that <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> had been
one of the Encyclopædists. His actual relation to this infamous
work was that he had read it in his youth, but abhorred it in his
later age.
</p>

<p>
The English physicist, <hi rend='italic'>Faraday</hi> (died 1867), according to
<hi rend='italic'>Tyndall</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi> the greatest experimentist of
all times, was, like <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi>, of religious mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In a letter to a lady he wrote: <q>I belong to a small and despised
Christian sect, known by the name of Sandemanians. Our hope is
based upon the belief which is in Christ.</q> In 1847, he concluded his
lectures at the Royal Institution with the following words: <q>In
teaching us those things, our science should prompt us to think of
Him whose works they are.</q> At a later lecture, he declared: <q>I have
never encountered anything to cause a contradiction between things
within the scope of man, and the higher things, relating to his future
and unconceivable to (unaided) human mind</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jones</hi>, The Life and
Letters of Faraday).
</p>

</quote>
<p>
Of the same bent of mind was <hi rend='italic'>Faraday's</hi> fellow countryman,
<hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi> (died 1879), known to every one who has studied the
development of the theories of electricity. This ingenious theoretician
of electrics, professor of experimental physics at Cambridge,
was deeply religious. Every evening he led in the family
prayer; he regularly attended divine service, and partook of the
monthly communion of his denomination. Those more intimately
acquainted with <hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi> agree, that he was one of the
worthiest men they ever met.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Nothing could better illustrate his religious sentiment than the
splendid prayer found among his posthumous papers: <q>Almighty God,
Thou who hast created man after Thy image and hast given him a
living soul, that he should search Thee and rule over Thy creatures,
teach us to study the works by Thy hands that we may subject the
earth for our use, and strengthen our reason for Thy service, and let us
receive Thy holy word thus, that we may believe in Him whom Thou
hast sent us to give us the knowledge of salvation and the forgiving of
our sins, all of which we pray for in the name of the same Jesus Christ,
our Lord</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Campbell-Garnett</hi>, The Life of J. C. Maxwell).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Maxwell's</hi> devout mind is especially significant here, because,
like <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi>, he occupied himself much with philosophical
and theological questions. Every Sunday upon return
<pb n='215'/><anchor id='Pg215'/>
from church he is said to have buried himself in his theological
books.
</p>

<p>
Many others might be mentioned of English physicists of the
past century, who combined religious belief with great knowledge.
The peculiar trait of the English character to respect and
preserve with piety the inherited institutions of the past, as
against radicalism and the craze for innovation, manifests itself
also in the absence of the immature and frivolous juggling with
the great truths of the Christian past, not infrequently met with
elsewhere. Let us mention but one more of England's great men
who have died in recent years. In December, 1907, the papers
reported the death of <hi rend='italic'>William Thomson</hi>, latterly better known
as <hi rend='italic'>Lord Kelvin</hi>. He lived to the age of 83 years, up to his death
incessantly busy with scientific work. As early as 1855, <hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz</hi>
described him as <q>one of the foremost mathematical
physicists of Europe.<note place='foot'>After visiting <hi rend='italic'>Thomson</hi> at Kreuznach, <hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz</hi> wrote: <q>He surpasses
all great scientists I have personally met, in acumen, clearness
and activity of spirit, so that I felt somewhat dull beside him.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz</hi> himself (died 1894) has never expressed himself about religion.
Absorbed by his scientific work, he seemed to have been
indifferent to religion, but according to his biographer his father was
a decided theist, and his philosophical views were held in great esteem,
and partly subscribed to, by the son. According to <hi rend='italic'>Dennert</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz</hi>
attended church now and then, and even partook of holy communion.
Of decided religious bent of mind was <hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz's</hi> fellow-countryman,
and co-discoverer of the law of energy, <hi rend='italic'>Robert Mayer</hi>. At the Congress
of scientists at Innsbruck, in 1869, <hi rend='italic'>Mayer</hi> ended his address with the
significant words: <q>Let me in conclusion declare from the bottom of
my heart that true philosophy cannot and must not be anything else
but propædeutics of the Christian religion.</q> His letters breathe piety.
For a time he had the intention of joining the Catholic Church.</note></q> The Berlin Academy of Science expressed
high praise and admiration in its address felicitating
<hi rend='italic'>Thomson</hi> on his Golden Jubilee. Undoubtedly, he merited this
admiration also by stoutly defending from the viewpoint of
science the necessity of a Divine Creator.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>We do not know,</q> he wrote, <q>at what moment a creation of matter
or of energy fixed a beginning beyond which no speculation based
on mechanical laws is able to lead us. In exact mechanics, if we were
ever inclined to forget this barrier, we necessarily would be reminded
of it by the consideration that reasoning, resting exclusively upon the
law of mechanics, points to a time when the earth must have been
<pb n='216'/><anchor id='Pg216'/>
uninhabited, and it also teaches us that our own bodies, like those of
all living plants and animals, and fossils, are organized forms of matter
for which science can give no other explanation than the will of a
Creator, a truth, in support of which geological history offers rich
evidence</q> (On Mechanical Antecedent of Motion, Heat and Light,
1884). <q>The only contribution of dynamics to theoretical biology consists
in the absolute negation of an automatic beginning and automatic
continuance of life</q> (Addresses and Speeches).
</p>

<p>
On May 1, 1902, the Rev. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>G. Henslow</hi>, according to the <hi rend='italic'>London
Times</hi>, spoke at University College, before a big audience with the
President of the University as chairman, on the subject <q>The Rationalism
of To-day, an Examination of Darwinism.</q> On conclusion of the
speech the venerable octogenarian, <hi rend='italic'>Lord Kelvin</hi>, arose and proposed a
resolution of thanks to the speaker. While fully subscribing to the
fundamental ideas of Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Henslow's</hi> lecture, <hi rend='italic'>Lord Kelvin</hi> said, he could
not assent to the proposition that natural science neither affirms nor
denies the origin of life by a creative force. He stated that natural
science <emph>does</emph>, positively, assert a creative force. Science forces every
one to recognize a miracle within himself. That we are living, and
moving, and existing, is not due to dead matter, but to a creating and
directing force, and science forces us to accept this assumption as a
tenet of faith. <hi rend='italic'>Lord Kelvin</hi> subsequently amplified these remarks in
an article that appeared in the <hi rend='italic'>Nineteenth Century</hi>, of June, 1903. It
concludes with the admonition, not to be afraid to think independently.
<q>If you reason sharply, you will be forced by science to believe in
God, who is the basis of all religion. You will find science to be, not
an opponent of religion, but a support</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Times</hi>, May 8 and 15, 1903).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Such were the views of those to whom, in the first place, the
establishment of natural science and its progress are due. It
is not science and strong reasoning that lead away from God,
but the lack of true science. <hi rend='italic'>Bacon</hi> said: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Leviores gustus in
philosophia movere fortasse animum ad atheismum, sed pleniores
haustus ad Deum reducere</foreign>. Another thing must be observed.
Among those earnest men, earnest in the investigation
of nature, and earnest in the consideration of questions of a
supernatural life, there are many who made the religious question
the subject of mature study, and who were well acquainted
with the objections against religion and Christianity. But
they cling to their religious persuasion only the more firmly.
We may be reminded of men like <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cauchy</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi>.
</p>

<p>
To speak of authorities, what comparison is there between
these great scientists and discoverers, and those who are satisfied
with the general assurance that <q>any one who has grasped the
<pb n='217'/><anchor id='Pg217'/>
elements of natural sciences must become a monist,</q> and <q>that
the supernatural exists only in the brain of the visionary and
ignorant,</q> that, <q>in the same measure in which the victorious
progress of modern knowledge of nature surpasses the scientific
achievements of former centuries, the untenableness of all mystical
views of life that tend to harness the reason in the yoke of
so-called revelation has been made clear</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>), and who
in such assurance find perfect intellectual gratification. They
recall an incident at the Congress of English natural scientists,
held at Belfast in 1874, when <hi rend='italic'>Tyndall</hi> delivered from the platform
a materialistic lecture, and among the audience sat <hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi>,
his superior in scientific research, who put down the lecture
in doggerel rhyme, in a humorous vein, of course, but not without
deserved sarcasm.
</p>

<p>
We proceed on our way, trying to make haste, and omitting
many names that might be mentioned, limiting ourselves to
the most prominent ones.
</p>

<p>
Among the chemists we name <hi rend='italic'>Lavoisier</hi>. A martyr to his
science, he died under the guillotine of the Revolution in
1794; he had remained true to his Christian faith. The Swede,
<hi rend='italic'>J. Berzelius</hi> (died 1848), openly professed his belief in God.
<hi rend='italic'>Thénard</hi> (died 1859), the discoverer of boron, of a blue dye
named after him, and of many other chemicals, was a staunch
Catholic. The pastor of St. Sulpice could testify at his funeral
as follows: <q>He attended church every Sunday, eyes and heart
fixed on his prayer-book, and on solemn Feast days he received
Holy Communion.... With <hi rend='italic'>Baron Thénard</hi> one of the greatest
benefactors of my poor people is gone</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kneller</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Dumas</hi> (died 1884), who is esteemed by his pupil <hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi>
as the peer of <hi rend='italic'>Lavoisier</hi>, was also a practical Catholic, as was
his compatriot <hi rend='italic'>Chevreul</hi> (died 1889). This great man had
the rare good fortune to be present at his own centenary in
1886. At this great celebration he received an address by
the Berlin Academy, stating that his name had a prominent
place on the list of the great scientists who had carried the
scientific repute of France to all quarters of the globe. When,
in view of the mundane character of the celebration, the liberal
press endeavoured to rank him among the representatives of
<pb n='218'/><anchor id='Pg218'/>
unbelieving science, and this question being discussed in public,
<hi rend='italic'>Chevreul</hi> felt himself constrained to proclaim his religious persuasion
openly in a letter to <hi rend='italic'>Count de Montravel</hi>, in which he
said: <q>I am simply a scientist, but those who know me, know
also that I was born a Catholic, that I lead a Catholic life,
and that I want to die a Catholic</q> (Civilta Cattolica, 1891,
292).
</p>

<p>
Two Germans may conclude the list of chemists, <hi rend='italic'>Schoenbein</hi>
(died 1868) and <hi rend='italic'>J. Liebig</hi> (died 1873).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In his diary, <q>Menschen und Dinge,</q> 1885 (page 29), <hi rend='italic'>Schoenbein</hi>
writes: <q>There are still people who fancy in their limited mind that,
the deeper the human intellect penetrates the secrets of nature, the more
extensive its knowledge, the wider its conception of the exterior
world, the more it must forget the cause of all things. Many have
gone even so far as to assert that natural science must lead to the
denial of God. This view is without all foundation. He, who contemplates
with open eyes, daily and hourly, the doings and workings of
nature, will not only believe, but will actually perceive, and be firmly
convinced, that there is not the smallest place in space where the
divine does not reveal itself in the most magnificent and admirable
way.</q> And in a similar strain <hi rend='italic'>Liebig</hi> writes: <q>Indeed, the greatness
and infinite wisdom of the Creator of the world can be realized only
by him who endeavours to understand His ideas as laid down in that
immense book,&mdash;nature, in comparison to which everything that men
otherwise know and tell of Him, appears like empty talk</q> (Die Chemie
in ihrer Anwendung).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Now let us turn to the geographers. We merely mention
<hi rend='italic'>Ritter</hi> (died 1859), the man who raised geography to the dignity
of a science; he was a faithful Protestant, while biassed against
the Catholic Church. In spite of this, a Catholic historian,
<hi rend='italic'>J. Janssen</hi>, has sketched his life, in which we read: <q>Firm in
his belief in the living God, and in the Incarnate Son of God,
His Redeemer, he furnishes a clear and convincing proof that
this faith, far from being a contradiction to natural science ...
alone enables man to acquire an extensive and deep knowledge
of nature.</q> We give only passing notice to the founder of scientific
crystallography, <hi rend='italic'>R. Hauy</hi> (died 1822), who was a dutiful
Catholic priest. The geologists now will get a hearing.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Among them we meet, in the first place, the noted geologist and
zoölogist, <hi rend='italic'>Cuvier</hi> (died 1832), a faithful Protestant: also the foremost
French geologist of his time, <hi rend='italic'>L. De Beaumont</hi> (died 1874), <q>a Christian
<pb n='219'/><anchor id='Pg219'/>
in all things and a steadfast Christian ... which he remained through
his whole life;</q> so <hi rend='italic'>Dumas</hi> testifies of him in his obituary (Comptes
Rendus, 1874). Then there is <hi rend='italic'>J. Barrande</hi>, the untiring explorer of
the antediluvian strata of Bohemia. He came in 1830 to Bohemia with
the banished royal family, as <hi rend='italic'>Chambord's</hi> teacher, and died 1883 at
Frohsdorf near Vienna. He was a pious Catholic. The volumes of his
works are nearly all dated on Catholic feasts. The recently deceased
French geologist, <hi rend='italic'>A. De Lapparent</hi>, was a practical Catholic, and such
were the two Belgian geologists, <hi rend='italic'>J. d'Omalius</hi> (died 1875), and <hi rend='italic'>A.
Dumont</hi> (died 1857), to both of whom Belgium owes its geological exploration.
The English geologists, <hi rend='italic'>Buckland</hi> (died 1856), <hi rend='italic'>Hitchcock</hi>
(died 1864), and <hi rend='italic'>A. Sedgwick</hi> (died 1872), were ministers of the English
Church. <hi rend='italic'>J. Dwight Dana</hi> (died 1895), the foremost geologist of
North America, begins his celebrated text-book of geology with a
homage to his Creator, and concludes it by paying tribute to Holy
Writ. <hi rend='italic'>W. Dawson</hi> (died 1899) the worthy geological explorer of his
native land, Canada, published several apologetic dissertations on the
Bible and Nature. A kindred sentiment animated the German scientists,
<hi rend='italic'>Bischof</hi> (died 1870), <hi rend='italic'>Quenstedt</hi> (died 1898), the geologist of
Suabia <hi rend='italic'>Pfaff</hi> (died 1886), <hi rend='italic'>Schafhæutl</hi> (died 1890), and the equally
pious as learned Swiss geologist <hi rend='italic'>O. Heer</hi> (died 1883). They all have
much to say about the greatness of their Creator, but not a word of any
insolvable contradictions between the Bible and geologic research.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
As a last division of an imposing phalanx, there are now the
biologists and physiologists. Modern biology, as the science of
life, has in the eyes of many accomplished the bold deed of
demonstrating the superfluity of a soul distinct from matter.
Claim is made that it has sufficiently explained the sensitive and
mental life by the sole agency of physical and chemical forces,
and thus to have removed the boundary between live and dead
matter. It is said, further, that biology in conjunction with
zoölogy and botany has furnished proof that the wonderful
organic forms of life may be explained by purely natural
causes, without having to assume as an ultimate cause the act
of a higher intelligence; that a never ceasing evolution is the
sole ultimate cause,&mdash;creation is made superfluous by evolution.
Biology is thus claimed to have refuted the old dualism of
soul and matter, of world and God, and to have awarded the
palm to monism.
</p>

<p>
Are the eminent representatives of this science really the
materialists and monists they would have to be, if all this
were true? The foremost physiologist of the nineteenth century
was <hi rend='italic'>J. Müller</hi> (died 1858), buried in the Catholic cemetery at
<pb n='220'/><anchor id='Pg220'/>
Berlin. He was a decided opponent of materialism; he not
only contended for the existence of a spiritual soul, but also
for an immaterial vital force in plants. <hi rend='italic'>Th. Schwann</hi> (died
1882) is the founder of the cellular theory. In the year
1839 he accepted a call to take the chair of anatomy at the
Catholic University of Louvain. One of the most prominent
physiologists of the nineteenth century was <hi rend='italic'>A. Volkmann</hi>
(died 1877). He was a stout champion of the spirituality
and immortality of the soul, of purposive cause in animated
beings, and an opponent of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi> theory. <hi rend='italic'>G. J. Mendel</hi>
(died 1884) became by his work on <hi rend='italic'>Experimenting with Hybrid
Plants</hi> the pioneer of the modern theory of hereditary transmission,
adopted by modern biology; and scientists like <hi rend='italic'>H. de
Vries</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Correns</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tschermak</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Bateson</hi> followed his lead. <q>His
important laws of hereditary transmission are the best so far
offered by the research in this field</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Muckermann</hi>, Grundriss
der Biologie). He was a Catholic priest, and the abbot of the
Augustinian Monastery at Old-Brünn. <hi rend='italic'>Karl von Vierordt</hi> (died
1884) is well known by his <q>Manual of Physiology,</q> still in
demand as a reference book in the libraries of universities. In
1865 he delivered a speech at the Tübingen University on the
unity of science, concluding with this appeal to the students:
<q>Until your religious notions become clear by a mature insight,
trust in the well-meant assurance that the belief in the divinity
of the religion of Jesus has not been put falsely into your
heart. True piety is equally remote from narrow pietism as
from freethinking indifference; it leaves to reason its full rights,
but it also assures to us the faculty to be aware, in joyful confidence
in Almighty Providence, of an immaterial and for us
eternal destiny.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Ch. Ehrenberg</hi> (died 1876) is the explorer
of the world of little things: of infusoria and protozoa. He
did not countenance <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel's</hi> materialism nor <hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi> denial
of teleology: to him they were fantastic theories and romances.
A friend of his, and of the same mind, was <hi rend='italic'>K. von Martius</hi>,
who admired God's wisdom in the wonders of the world of vegetation.
Long before his death he ordered his burial dress to
be made of white cloth embroidered with a green cross,&mdash;<q>a
cross because I am a Christian, and green in honour of botany.</q>
<pb n='221'/><anchor id='Pg221'/>
Another renowned name may be mentioned, that of the Austrian
anatomist <hi rend='italic'>J. Hyrtl</hi> (died 1894).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the years when materialism was flourishing, <hi rend='italic'>Hyrtl</hi> was painfully
grieved to see science fall into disrepute through the fault of individuals.
He gave vent to his indignation on the occasion of the fifth
centenary of the Vienna University (1864), when, having been elected
Rector, and being considered the greatest celebrity at that college, he delivered
his inaugural speech on the materialistic tendency of our times.
Summing up he said: <q>I am at a loss how to explain what scientific
grounds there are to defend and fortify a revival of the old materialistic
views of an <hi rend='italic'>Epicurus</hi> and a <hi rend='italic'>Lucretius</hi>, and to endeavour to insure to
it a permanent rule.... Its success is due to the boldness of its assertion
and to the prevailing spirit of the time, which popularizes teachings
of this sort the more willingly, the more danger they seem to entail
for the existing order of things.</q> It was the same protest made
some years later by another famous scientist against <q>the dangerous
opinion that there were dogmas of natural science in inimical opposition
to the highest ideals of the human mind.</q> He stated that <q>it would be
a desirable reward for the efforts of our foremost naturalists to erect
with the aid of anthropology a barrier to this error which is so
demoralizing for the people</q> (<hi rend='italic'>J. Ranke</hi>, Der Mensch, 1894).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Hyrtl's</hi> speech at once aroused a storm of indignation in the liberal
press of Vienna, and the great scientist, until then honoured and extolled,
became the object of denunciation and sneer. Thus was the
freedom of science understood in those circles.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> was much vexed by two fellow scientists, <hi rend='italic'>M. von Baer</hi> (died
1876) and <hi rend='italic'>G. J. Romanes</hi> (died 1894). <hi rend='italic'>Baer</hi> was prominent in the
science of evolution. He was led to theism by his studies. <hi rend='italic'>Romanes</hi>,
a friend of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, had been an adherent of materialism, but through
serious study he returned to the belief in God and Christianity. His
posthumous work, <q>Thoughts on Religion, a scientist's religious evolution
from Atheism to Christianity,</q> furnishes a brilliant voucher
thereof. <hi rend='italic'>Romanes's</hi> conversion was a sad blow for <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>. However,
he constructed an explanation to give himself comfort. <q>When the news
of this conversion,</q> he wrote, <q>was first circulated by a friend of
<hi rend='italic'>Romanes</hi>, a zealous English Churchman, the assumption suggested itself
to me that it was all a mystification and invention, for it is
known that the fanatical champions of ecclesiastical superstition have
never hesitated to pervert the truth to save their dogma. Later on,
however, it was found that it was really an instance (analogous to
the case of old <hi rend='italic'>Baer</hi>) of one of those interesting psychological metamorphoses
with which I have dealt in Chapter 6 of my book. <hi rend='italic'>Romanes</hi>
was in his last years a sick man. It was pathological debility. The
first condition, however, of an unbiassed, pure conception of reason is
the normal condition of its organ. His phronema was not in a normal
condition.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> will have to rank among those whose phronema is
not in a normal condition a good many other natural scientists; indeed,
most of those of higher standing.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='222'/><anchor id='Pg222'/>

<p>
Every one knows the celebrated name of <hi rend='italic'>Louis Pasteur</hi> (died
1895), the discoverer of various bacteria, of whom <hi rend='italic'>Huxley</hi> says
that his manifold inventions have repaid to French industry the
five billion francs indemnity which France had to pay to Germany
after the war. It is equally well known that <hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi>
was to his death a staunch Catholic. <q>As his soul departed, he
held in his hands a small cross of brass, and his last words were
the confession of faith and hope</q> (La Science Catholique, X,
1896, 182). The story is told that one of his pupils asked him
how he could be so religious after all his thinking and studying.
<hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi> replied: <q>Just because I have thought and studied, I
remained religious like a man of Brittany, and had I thought
and studied still more, I would be as religious as a woman of
Brittany</q> (Revue des Questions Scientifiques, 1896, 385).
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In the year 1859 great commotion was caused in the world of
thought by the appearance of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi> book on the <q>Origin of Species.</q>
It stated that the various species had gradually evolved from most
simple, primordial forms, and this by natural selection; not, therefore,
in the sense that the Creator had put the laws of evolution into
nature, but that in the struggle for existence the survival of the
fittest was the result of natural selection. Soon it was claimed that
man, too, in his rational life, was the result of an evolution from
animal stages; indeed, the whole universe had arisen by the survival
of the accidentally fittest. Evolution was to be substituted for creation.
In Germany, <hi rend='italic'>E. Haeckel</hi> was the man who considered it the
task of his life to spread those ideas as the established result of
science. In our own time a belated high tide is sweeping over the
intellectual lowlands.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> himself was an agnostic; to begin with, he lacked all religious
training; his mother had died early, his father was a free-thinker,
and his education at school was rationalistic. The doubt of
all higher truths, and finally, according to his own confession, the
doubt respecting the power of reason, were his companions through
life. Yet he confesses: <q>... I never was an atheist in the sense that
I would deny the existence of God. I think, in general (and more so
the older I grow), but not at all times, agnostic would be a more
accurate description of my state of mind</q> (<hi rend='italic'>F. Darwin</hi>, The Life and
Letters of Charles Darwin, I, 304). Remarkable, however, is the following
passage at the end of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi> chief work: <q>It is a great
belief, indeed, of the Creator having breathed the embryo of all life
surrounding us into a few forms, or in but one single form, and
an endless row of most beautiful, most wonderful forms having evolved
and are still evolving from such a simple beginning, while our planet,
following the laws of gravitation, has steadily revolved in its circle.</q>
<pb n='223'/><anchor id='Pg223'/>
What <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> was lacking in a high degree was a philosophical training
of the mind.
</p>

<p>
In itself the <emph>theory of evolution</emph>, which asserts the variability of
species of animals and plants, is by no means opposed to religious
truths. It neither includes a necessity of assuming the origin of the
human soul from the essentially lower animal soul, nor is it an
atheistic theory. On the contrary, such an evolution would most
clearly certify to God's wisdom in laying such a wonderful basis for
the progress of nature, provided this theory could be proved by scientific
facts; indeed, for an evolution within narrow limits, circumstantial
evidence is not lacking. That there is no contradiction between
the theory of evolution and the fundamental tenets of Christian Creed
is sufficiently shown by the representatives of the theory. <hi rend='italic'>Lamarck</hi>
(died 1829) and <hi rend='italic'>Saint-Hilaire</hi> (died 1844), both of them representatives
of the theory of evolution long before <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, believed in God.
There were, prior to <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, two celebrated Catholic scientists, to wit,
<hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>d'Omalius</hi>, who had decidedly taken the part of <hi rend='italic'>Saint-Hilaire</hi>
in his controversy with <hi rend='italic'>Cuvier</hi>. And also after <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, a
number of Christian and Catholic scientists have contended for the
idea of evolution, as, for instance, the pious Swiss geologist, <hi rend='italic'>Heer</hi>;
also <hi rend='italic'>Quenstedt</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Volkmann</hi>, and the American geologist, <hi rend='italic'>Ch. Lyell</hi>.
More recently Catholic scientists have expressed themselves in favour
of the theory of evolution; for instance, the noted zoölogist, <hi rend='italic'>E. Wasmann</hi>,
and the geologists <hi rend='italic'>Lossen</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>W. Waagen</hi>, both of whom had to
bring bitter sacrifices in their career on account of their Catholic faith.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Mature Science Respects Faith.</head>

<p>
There have now passed in review the great natural scientists
of the past, those living at the present time we shall leave to the
judgment of the future. Is it true, then, that the foremost representatives
of natural science had the conviction that science
and faith are incompatible? No! On the contrary, most of
them, and the greatest of them, have professed the fundamental
truths of religion, or have even been devout Christians
themselves.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Theism in natural science, or, if you prefer, in natural philosophy,</q>
so says a modern scientist, <q>rests upon the basis of a fundamental
view which an old formula has clothed in words as simple as they are
sublime: <q>I believe in God, the Almighty Creator of Heaven and of
Earth.</q> This confession does not cling to theistic scientists like an
egg-shell from the time of unsophisticated childhood faith; it is the
result of their entire scientific thought and judgment. This conviction
has been professed by the most discerning natural scientists of all ages</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>J. Reinke</hi>, Naturwissenschaft und Religion).
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='224'/><anchor id='Pg224'/>

<p>
Still it cannot be denied that some of the great scientists
were of different mind, men like <hi rend='italic'>R. von Virchow</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Tyndall</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>A.
von Humboldt</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi>. Nor shall it be disputed
that, at the present time, a large number of men of average
learning are on the side of unbelief. However, it must not be
forgotten that unbelief is more frequently pretended to the outside
world for appearance's sake than it really dwells in the
heart. This is, to a great extent, due to human respect, to public
opinion, and the prevailing tendency of science. Then again,
it must be remembered, that religiously minded scientists are
often crowded out from the schools of science, with the natural
result that the others predominate. Another point to be borne
in mind is that the atheistic representatives of science are doing
more to get themselves talked about; they are seeking more
diligently the attention of public opinion. Men like <hi rend='italic'>Tyndall</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Vogt</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Moleschott</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, are known in larger circles than
men like <hi rend='italic'>Faraday</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Volta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi>, who, engaged
in serious work, gave no time to making propaganda, as
the others did by lecturing and popular writing for materialistic
and monistic views in the name of science; they had no
desire for the limelight of attention, and for posing as personified
science.
</p>

<p>
All this does not change the fact that a very large number, indeed
the largest number, of natural scientists of first rank were
believers in God, or of pious, Christian mind. And that is
of the greater importance. To do pioneer work in the field of
science, to give impetus, to make progress, requires a penetrating
and, at the same time, an independent mind, one that
can rise above conventional commonplace. The fact that such
men have largely been very religious, that they never belittled
religion, weighs much more in the balance than the disparagement
of inferior minds.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
These, then, are the often-cited witnesses for the incompatibility
of science and faith. While only taken from the province
of natural science, they may in our case be deemed representative
of science in general. For natural science is generally regarded
the most exact of all, and as the one which, more than
<pb n='225'/><anchor id='Pg225'/>
any other, has the scientific spirit said to be incompatible with
faith, and which, by many, is believed to have brought about in
the modern world of thought the irreconcilable conflict between
faith and science. This is not so! Such antagonism does <hi rend='italic'>not</hi>
exist. It cannot exist, because it is certain from the outset
that both faith and science unfold the truth. Truth, however,
can never be in conflict with truth. Nor has that antagonism
ever existed historically in any of the great representatives of
science. This antagonism is fictitious, it is false in its very
essence. It is fabricated, either by distorting faith into a blind
belief of absurd things, or else by distorting the human faculty
of conception into infallible omniscience, or, the other extreme,
by denying its faculty for a higher perception.
</p>

<p>
Faith has nothing to fear from a mature science that has
arrived at the conviction of its cognitions, nor has it anything
to fear from the great intellects who reason profoundly and
seriously. But it has to fear mock-science and ignorance, and
those small and superficial minds that aim at stretching their
pseudo-knowledge to a gigantic infallibility.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='227'/><anchor id='Pg227'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Third Section. The Liberal Freedom of Research.</head>

<pb n='229'/><anchor id='Pg229'/>

<div>
<head>The Yoke of the Sun.</head>

<p>
The gifted Danish writer and convert, <hi rend='italic'>J. Jörgensen</hi>, tells
a parable which is pregnant with thought. <q>In the
midst of a large rye-field,</q> he relates, <q rend='pre'>there stood a tall
poplar, with other trees standing nearby. One day the poplar
turned to the other trees and plants, and thus began
to speak: <q>Sisters and brothers! To us, the glorious tribe
of plants, belongs the earth, and everything upon it is dependent
on us. We fertilize and feed ourselves, while beasts
and men are fed and clothed by us. Indeed, the earth itself
feeds upon our decaying leaves, upon our boughs and branches.
There is only one power in the world our existence and growth
is said to depend on; I refer to the Sun. I purposely used the
words, <q>is said,</q> because I am sure that we do not depend
on the Sun. This doctrine of sunlight being a necessity and
a benefit to our plant life is nothing but a superstition, which
at last ought to give way to enlightenment.</q> Here the poplar
paused. From some old oaks and elms in the neighbouring
grove there came signs of disapproval, but the inconstant rye-field
muttered assent. Thus encouraged and raising its voice
the poplar continued: <q>I know well that there is a musty faction
amongst us which clings obstinately to obsolete views. However,
I have confidence in the independence of the younger generation
of plants. They will realize the baseness of continuing to do
homage to an absurd superstition. Our freeborn heads shall
never bow to a yoke, not even to the yoke of the Sun. Down,
therefore, with that yoke! And free from restraint there will
arise a free and beautiful generation that will astonish the
world.</q> The poplar paused for the second time, and now the
applause was long and loud, the fields cheered and the groves
gave boisterous applause, so that the disapproval of a few old
<pb n='230'/><anchor id='Pg230'/>
trees could not be heard. The following days looked upon
an odd spectacle. At daybreak, when the Sun ascended and
cast its first rays over the landscape, the flowers closed their
cups and denied admission, as if asleep; the leaves no longer
turned toward the Sun. But when the dispenser of warmth
and light had gone down behind the hills, the gayly coloured
flowers opened in the dim starlight, as if now the time had
come for them to grow and blossom.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>Alas, how sad was the fate of these poor rebels! The rye
soon began to languish till it lay prone on the ground; green
leaves turned yellow, the flowers drooped, faded and withered.
Then the plants began to grumble at the poplar. There it
stood, its leaves a seared yellow. <q>What simpletons you are,
brothers and sisters!</q> it said. <q>Can't you see that now you
are much more like yourselves than under the rule of the Sun?
Now you are refined, independent beings, well rid of the sluggish
health of yore.</q> There were some who still believed what
the poplar said. <q>We are independent, we are unfettered,</q> they
clamoured, till the last spark of life was gone. Not long after
the poplar, too, stood there with its branches bared,&mdash;it had
died. The farmers, however, complained about the failing of
the crop, and consoled themselves by hoping for better success
the next year.</q>
</p>

<p>
A parable of deep meaning! It may serve as an illustration
for the facts stated, and for those yet to be dealt with.
</p>

<p>
According to the Christian view, man is dependent on
his Creator, from whom he receives life and light, and, in
the same way, his mind depends on truth, by which it lives as
the plants live, by the light and the warmth of the sun. To
many generations this was self-evident, and withal they felt
themselves free, because they looked for the freedom only
of the dependent creature. And, keeping within these bounds,
they had a cheerful existence in the happy possession of their
faith, contented and serene in the possession of truth; their
higher spiritual life throve and flourished, promoted by the
Eternal Giver of light and warmth, who held out to them the
prospect of completing their mental life in the contemplation
of His eternal truth.
</p>

<pb n='231'/><anchor id='Pg231'/>

<p>
What the fathers deemed self-evident has now become a
problem to their sons. What to their fathers was lofty and
revered, the things to which they ascribed their ennoblement,
have become to the sons an obstacle to free development.
They have forgotten what they are. They demand independence
and freest realization of their own individuality, in
which they see the sole source of greatness and progress. In
every dependence they perceive a hampering of their natural
development.
</p>

<p>
We have in previous chapters become acquainted with this
<emph>liberal freedom</emph>, particularly in reasoning and in scientific research,
the child of the philosophy of humanitarianism and subjectivism,
the philosophy that emancipates man from God's
rule, from the immutable religious truths, and which sees in
this emancipation perfect freedom. We have listened to the
arguments in behalf of this position, especially arguments
against the duty to believe. All that we have set forth hitherto
was to prove that such a freedom is not required. In the
faithful adherence to God's revelation and to His Church there
is no degradation of reason, an exaltation rather; because
to join in the eternal reason of its Creator is not bondage but
a privilege.
</p>

<p>
We proceed. We shall demonstrate that this freedom is not
only not required, but that it is entirely untenable and ruinous;
that it is especially so because it is urged and demanded in
the name of truth and proper order, in the name of uplift of
human intellectual life, and of progress towards real enlightenment.
We shall see that this freedom is not a liberation from
mean fetters, but simply a revolt against the natural order,
an apostasy from God and the supernatural which one shuns.
Hence, not the natural and orderly development of the human
individual, but a principle of negation under the garb of freedom,
the severance of man from the sources of his greatness and
strength, the perversion of true science; not the only admissible
scientific method, but an altogether unscientific method. We
shall show that it becomes thereby the principle of mental
pauperization and decay, a principle of mental decadence, which
in the sphere of idealism will reduce mankind to beggary.
<pb n='232'/><anchor id='Pg232'/>
Thereby public testimony is given that in the midst of mankind
there is needed an intelligent force that preserves, with conscientious
earnestness and unyielding firmness, the intellectual
inheritance of mankind, the ideal treasures of truth and of
morality.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='233'/><anchor id='Pg233'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Free From The Yoke Of The Supernatural.</head>

<div>
<head>Ignoramus, We Ignore.</head>

<p>
The liberal principle of research rests on the basis of
the humanitarian view of the world, which makes man
autonomous, and causes him to turn his eyes from above and
downward, and to fix them upon his earthly existence. To
remain true to its own idea, this liberal science will feel the
necessity to sever itself gradually from the restraining powers
of the world beyond, and to shun the thought of God and of
His divine influence and supremacy over the world and human
life. It must resent such truths as a burdensome yoke that
oppresses human freedom.
</p>

<p>
And to this thought it remains faithful, if not in all its
representatives, then at any rate in a good many of them. With
unremitting persistency it enforces in all its domains the demand:
<emph>Science must not reckon with supernatural factors</emph>.
Ignoramus is its watchword, <q>we do not know it</q> in the
sense of its usual agnosticism, but <q>we ignore it</q> in the spirit of
the impulse which dreads the loss of its freedom through higher
powers. Creation and miracles, divine revelation and the God-imposed
duty of belief, it does not know. A moral law, as given
by God, does not exist for this science. It wants nothing to do
with a religion that worships a personal God, much less with
a supernatural religion, with mysteries, miracles, and grace. It
praises all the higher that modern religion of sentiment, without
dogmas and religious duties, which sovereign man creates for
himself, a poetical adornment of his individuality, a religion he
need not ask what he owes it, but rather what it offers him. All
connection with the world beyond is cut off. Man is now free in
his own house. We shall show this in detail, by the testimony
<pb n='234'/><anchor id='Pg234'/>
chiefly of men generally accepted as foremost representatives
of modern science. We do not assert, however, that all representatives
of modern science belong here. Far be it from us
to sit in judgment as to the good intentions of the champions
of liberal science. We know very well that an education indifferent
to religion, early habitual association with the ideas
of a sceptical, naturalistic philosophy, the acquisition of prejudices
and unsolved difficulties, a continuous stay in an intellectual
atmosphere foreign and inimical to religious belief&mdash;all
this, we well understand, will gradually rob the mind of
all inclination and unbiassed judgment for religious truth,
and thus make for apostasy from religion. Nor do we assert
that the idea of God and Christianity are extinct in the hearts
of the representatives of liberal science, but we do assert that
their <emph>science</emph> no longer wants to know God and His true religion,
that only too often it is in the grip of a Theophobia,
which slinks past God and His works, with its eyes designedly
averted.
</p>

<p>
At the same time the <emph>unprepossession of this science</emph> will
be made clear. <q>A feeling of degradation pervades the German
university circles,</q> so the learned <hi rend='italic'>Mommsen</hi> expressed himself
some years ago when Strassburg was to get a Catholic chair
of history; therefore a Catholic who takes his Catholic view
of the world as his guide cannot be unprepossessed, hence cannot
be a true scientist. We have become used to this reproach;
nevertheless it is very painful to a Catholic, especially when he
devotes his life to scientific work. The other side claims very
emphatically to have a monopoly on unprepossession and truthfulness;
it gives most solemn assurances of not desiring anything
but the truth, of serving the truth alone, with persevering
unselfishness, unaffected by disposition and party interest, and
that it has its unbiassed spiritual eye turned only to the chaste
sunlight of truth. Hence, we may be permitted to inquire
whether these assurances square with the facts. As they demand
belief, we may also demand proofs; and if those assurances
are accompanied by sharp accusations, the accused will
have even a greater right to examine the deeds and records of
this assertive science.
</p>

<pb n='235'/><anchor id='Pg235'/>

<p>
What about the unprepossession of liberal science, especially
in the province of philosophy and religion? It cannot be our
intention to explore the whole territory in every direction.
We shall keep to the central and main road, the road to which
chiefly lead all other roads of life, we mean the attitude of
this school of research towards the world beyond. We find
this attitude to be one of persistent ignoring! Science cannot
acknowledge the supernatural; this presumption, unproved and
impossible of proof, it never loses sight of, it is even made a scientific
principle, which is called:
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Principle of Exclusive Natural Causation.</head>

<p>
This principle demands that everything belonging to nature
in its widest sense, consequently all objects and events of irrational
nature and of human life, must be explained by natural
causes only; supernatural factors must not be brought in. To
assume an interposition by God, in the form of creation, miracle,
or revelation, is unscientific; he who does so is not a true scientist.
A presumption, a mandate of truly stupendous enormity!
How can it be proved that there is no God, that creation,
miracles, the supernatural origin of religion, are impossible
things? And if they are possible, why should it be forbidden
to make use of them in explaining facts which cannot otherwise
be explained?
</p>

<p>
However, it is readily admitted that the principle is merely
a postulate, an <emph>unproved</emph> presumption.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The postulate of exclusive natural causation tells us that natural
events can have their causes only in other natural events, and
not in conditions lying outside of the continuity of natural causality</q>;
so <hi rend='italic'>W. Wundt</hi>. This is a <q>postulate, accepted by modern natural
science partly tacitly, partly by open profession.</q> <q>Even where an
exact deduction is not possible, natural science nevertheless acts under
this supposition. It never will consider a natural event to be causally
explained, if it is attempted to derive that event from other conditions
than preceding natural events.</q>
</p>

<p>
Professor <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi> protests against alliance with the Catholic Church,
for the reason that the latter does not acknowledge the fundamental
presumption of all scientific research, namely, the uninterrupted natural
causation, and because the Church is essentially founded on supernatural
presumptions. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>A. Messer</hi> thinks he has proved sufficiently
the untenableness of the Catholic faith by the simple appeal to this
<pb n='236'/><anchor id='Pg236'/>
presumption: <q>Natural sciences rest upon the presumption that everything
is causally determined. This means, that the same causes must
be followed by the same effects, and all natural events take their course
according to invariable laws. It is against this presumption that
the Church exacts a belief in miracles, in immediate divine manifestations,
not explainable by natural causes. <emph>God</emph> is not a causal
factor in the eyes of natural science, because everything, and for that
very reason, nothing, could be explained through Him.</q> We see that
the principle is expressly admitted to be a mere presumption. <q>I
concede readily,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, <q>that the law of natural causation
is not a proven fact, but a demand or presumption with which reason
approaches the task of explaining natural phenomena. But this
postulate ... is the hard-fought victory of long scientific effort....
Gradually there were eliminated from the course of nature demoniacal
influence and the miraculous intervention of God, and in their stead
the idea of natural causation was installed.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is merely another expression for the same thing if one
calls, with <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, the unbroken causal connection <q>the fundamental
presumption of all our natural research</q>; or concludes,
with <hi rend='italic'>A. Drews</hi>, that the assumption of a transcendental
God, beyond the visible, and in causal relation to the world,
destroys the universal conformity to laws in the world, the
self-evident presumption of all scientific knowledge; or one
may say, with <hi rend='italic'>F. Steudel</hi>, <q>The theory of unbroken causal connection
has become the fundamental presupposition of all philosophical
explanation of world happenings. This finally disposes
of a transcendental God, together with his empiric correlative,
the miracle, as a philosophical explanation of the world.</q> The
same result is achieved by declaring evolution from natural
factors as the universal world-law.
</p>

<p>
<q><emph>I Know not God the Father, Almighty Creator of
Heaven and of Earth</emph></q>
</p>

<p>
With inexorable persistency this principle is now applied
wherever science meets with God and the world beyond.
Hence, let us proceed on our way and halt at some points to
watch this science at work.
</p>

<p>
The unbiassed reasoning of the mind shows that this world,
limited and finite, in all its phenomena accidental and perishable,
cannot have in itself the cause of its existence, hence, that it
<pb n='237'/><anchor id='Pg237'/>
demands a supernatural creative cause. This solution of the
question is by no means demonstrated by liberal science as
untenable, it is simply declined.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Natural science, once for all, has not the least occasion to assume
a supernatural act of creation</q>; this we are told by the famous
historian of materialism, <hi rend='italic'>F. A. Lange</hi>. <q>To fall back upon explanations
of this sort amounts always to straying from scientific grounds,
which not only is not permissible in a scientific investigation, but
should never enter into consideration.</q> And <hi rend='italic'>L. Plate</hi> states: <q>A creation
of matter we cannot assume, nor would such an assumption be
any explanation at all; at most, it would be tantamount to exchanging
one question mark for another. We natural scientists are modest
enough, as matters now stand, to forego a further solution of the question.</q>
They will subscribe to <hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond's</hi> <q>ignoramus</q> rather
than assume the only solution of the question, an act of creation.
This scientist, asking himself the question, from where the world-matter
received its first impulse, argues: <q>Let us try to imagine a
primordial condition, where matter had not yet been influenced by
any cause, and we arrive at the conclusion that matter an infinite
time ago was inactive, and equally distributed in infinite space.
Since a supernatural impulse does not fit into our theory of the universe,
an adequate cause for the first action is lacking.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus they frankly violate the scientific method that demands
acceptance of the explanation demonstrated as necessary,
and violate it only for the reason to dodge the acknowledgment
of a Creator. This is not science, but politics.
</p>

<p>
But let us ask, Why should it be against science to reckon
with supernatural factors? Is it because we cannot disclose
with certainty the other world? Are they not aware that such
a principle is opposed by the conviction of all mankind, that
always held these conceptions to be the highest, and therefore
not to be considered illusions? Do they not see, moreover,
how they involve themselves in flagrant contradictions? Does
not science by means of its laws of reasoning, especially
on the principle of causality, constantly infer invisible causes
from visible facts? From physical-chemical facts ether and
physical atoms, which no man has ever seen, are deduced: from
falling stones and the movement of astral bodies is inferred a
universal gravitation, undemonstrable by experience; from an
anonymous letter is deduced an author. The astronomer deduces
from certain facts that fixed stars must have dark companions,
<pb n='238'/><anchor id='Pg238'/>
visible to no one; from disturbances in the movements
of Uranus <hi rend='italic'>Leverrier</hi> found by calculation the existence
and location of Neptune, then not as yet discovered. Hence,
what does it mean: <q>to fall back upon explanations of this
sort always amounts to straying away from scientific ground</q>?
Let us imagine a noble vessel on the high seas to have become
the victim of a catastrophe. It lies now at the bottom of the
sea. Fishes come from all sides and stop musingly before the
strange visitor. Whence did this come? Was it made out of
water? Impossible! Did it creep up from the bottom of the
sea? No! At last a fish reasons: <q>What we see here has
undoubtedly come down to us from a higher world, far above
us, and invisible to us.</q> The speech meets with approval. But
another fish objects: <q>Nonsense! To fall back upon explanations
of this sort always amounts to straying away from the
scientific grounds on which we fish must stand. We cannot
assume such a world to exist, because this would offend against
the first principle of our science, the principle of the exclusive
natural causation of sea and water.</q> With these words the
speaker departs, wagging his tail, his speech having been received
with stupefaction rather than with understanding.
</p>

<p>
To this philosophy may be applied the word of the Apostle:
<q>Beware lest any man cheat you by philosophy and vain deceit</q>
(Col. ii. 8). No, it is not the spirit of true science
that opposes the belief in supernatural factors, but it is the
desertion of the traditions and the spirit of a better science.
To the representatives of paganism, to <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> and others, the
highest goal of human quest of truth was to find God and
to worship Him. For the great leaders in recent natural science,
<hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Linné</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Boyle</hi>,<hi rend='italic'> Volta</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Faraday</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Maxwell</hi>, the highest achievement was to point to God's wisdom
in the wonderful works of nature; their science ended
in prayer. A principle of unbroken natural causation, as a
boycott of the Deity, was to them not a postulate of science
but an abomination. They were carried by a conviction expressed
by a later scientist, <hi rend='italic'>W. Thomson</hi>, in the following words:
<q>Fear not to be independent thinkers! If you think vigorously
enough, you will be forced by science to believe in a God, Who
<pb n='239'/><anchor id='Pg239'/>
is the basis of all religion</q>; and expressed by <hi rend='italic'>R. Mayer</hi> in the
following words: <q>True philosophy must not and cannot be
anything else but the propædeutics of the Christian religion.</q>
</p>

<p>
But let us proceed. We have before us an astonishing <emph>order</emph>,
we behold uncounted wonders of well-designed purpose in the
world. The question suggests itself: Whence this Order? The
watch originates from the intelligence of a maker, an accident
could not have produced it; hence also the great world-machine
must have had an intelligent maker. This is the logic of unbiassed
reason. But the principles of liberal research object to
the acceptance of this explanation. What is theirs?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There have been some scientists endeavouring to discover the purposeless
in nature, and they have gleaned various things. <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> invented
for them the name Dysteleologists; and this is now the name they go by.
Why the destruction of so many living embryos? What is the purpose
of pain, of the vermiform appendix? <q>To what purpose is the immense
belt of desert extending through both large continents of the Old World?
Could the Sahara not have been avoided?... Indeed, numerous forms
of life we cannot look at but with repugnance and horror; for instance,
the parasitical beings.</q> ... (<hi rend='italic'>F. Paulsen</hi>). Hence the order claimed
for the world does not exist, on the contrary, <q>it is beyond doubt that
the most essential means of nature is of a kind which can only be
put on a level with the blindest accident</q> (<hi rend='italic'>F. A. Lange</hi>). But they
do not feel satisfied with this. They feel that even if all these things
were actually purposeless, they would amount only to a few drops
in the immense ocean of order which still has to be explained. At
most, they would form but a few typographical errors in an otherwise
ingenious book,&mdash;errors that evidently are no proof that the whole
book is a mass of nonsense and not dictated by reason.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
There appears to them, like a rescuing plank in a shipwreck,
<hi rend='italic'>Darwin's</hi> Natural Selection. The artistic forms in the kingdom
of plants and animals arose, says <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, by the fact that,
among numerous seemingly tentative formations, there were
some useful organs or their rudiments which survived in the
struggle for existence and became hereditary in the offspring,
while others disappeared. It was seen very soon, and it is even
better understood to-day, that this enormous feat of <q>natural
selection</q> is contrary to the facts, and would be, above all, an
incredible accident. Nevertheless <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> has become the rescuing
knight for many who became alarmed about the threatening
Supernaturalism.
</p>

<pb n='240'/><anchor id='Pg240'/>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi> speaks very frankly: <q>Albeit, in holding to this
theory we may feel like a man kept from drowning only by holding
firmly to a plank just strong enough to keep him afloat. But when
we have to choose between a plank and death, the preference will
decidedly be with the plank.</q> The same idea is expressed somewhat
more gracefully by <hi rend='italic'>W. Ostwald</hi>: <q>That the quite complicated problem
concerning the purposiveness of organism loses its character of a riddle,
at least in principle, and assumes the aspect of a scientific task, all
by virtue of this simple thought ... is a gain that cannot be sufficiently
appreciated.</q> With vehement plainness <hi rend='italic'>H. Spitzer</hi> maintains:
<q>Purposiveness in nature, which was feared by positive research like a
ghost, because it really seemed only to be due to the intervention of
ghosts in the course of the world, has now been traced by <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> to
its origin from natural causes, and he thereby made it a fit object for
the science that is at home only in the sphere of natural causes.</q> <q>To
the height of this point of view,</q> <hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi> boasts, <q>we have been
led by modern natural research in <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>.</q><note place='foot'>Others take refuge in the fantastic theory of an <q>All-Animation.</q>
According to it all organisms, including trees, shrubs, grasses, are
possessed of a soulful sensation and feeling for the purposes they
serve, and for the elaborate actions they undertake: this is the
reason for their efficacy, not because a wise Creator had arranged them
thus. <hi rend='italic'>R. H. Francé</hi> exclaims triumphantly: <q>When the powers that be
should ask in their dissatisfaction: <q>Where has God a place in your
system?</q> we can answer calmly: <q>We do not need the hypothesis of a
personal God.</q></q> God is superfluous&mdash;this is the precious gain which
this unscientific explanation is to yield.</note>
</p>

<p>
At any rate one thing is settled: <q>The theological explanation must
be rejected,</q> as <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> puts it. <q>It sees in adaptation the proof for
the love and kindness of a Creator, who has ordered all organisms most
conformable to their purpose. Natural Science cannot accept such an
explanation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Is this the boasted spirit of truthfulness, which desires only
the truth,&mdash;but is evading it persistently? Is this that unbiassed
eye that seeks only the truth? Truly, it seems to be
unsound, since it cannot bear the rays of truth. Let us go to
another workshop of liberal science. It is known now that our
earth has once been a ball of glowing fluid, with a temperature
in which no living being could exist. Consequently the latter
must have appeared at a later stage of evolution. As a fact,
palæontology does not show any remnants of organisms in the
lower strata of the earth. Now again a question suggests itself
to the scientist, <emph>Whence did the first life come from?</emph> We
have the choice of only two explanations: either it has risen
by itself, out of unorganic, dead matter, or it was produced by
<pb n='241'/><anchor id='Pg241'/>
the hand of a Creator: either by <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>generatio aequivoca</foreign> or the
act of creation. Now there has never been observed a <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>generatio
aequivoca</foreign>, as is testified to by natural science itself, and never
has it been accomplished in the laboratory. Therefore, inasmuch
as the natural laws of olden times cannot have been any
different from those of the present, there has never been a
primordial genesis. Do they perhaps give the Creator his due
here, where the case is so obvious? Let us see.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The noted zoölogist, <hi rend='italic'>R. Hertwig</hi>, writes: <q>Inasmuch as there has
doubtless been a time when the prevailing temperature of our globe
made any life impossible, there must have been a time when life on it
arose either by an act of creation or by primordial genesis. If, conformable
to the spirit of natural sciences, we are relying only on natural
forces for an explanation of natural phenomena, then we are necessarily
led to the hypothesis of primordial genesis,</q> although it contradicts all
experience. But the deduction is only brought forth as a <q>logical postulate</q>:
there <q>must</q> be such genesis after creation is eliminated.
<q>We natural scientists say,</q> states <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>, <q>that all living beings must
have originated some time in former geological periods ... from dead,
unorganic matter; to assume a creation would be no explanation at all,
exactly as it would be no explanation to assume the creation of
matter.</q> Which philosophy teaches that it is not an explanation of a
fact to assume for it the only reasonable cause? But just this cause
they do not want. <hi rend='italic'>Virchow</hi> says in this respect: <q>If I do not wish
to assume a creative act, if I desire to explain the matter in my way,
then it is clear that I must resort to <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>generatio aequivoca</foreign>. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Tertium non
datur.</foreign> There is nothing else left, if one once has said: <q>I do not
accept creation, but I want an explanation of it.</q> If this is the first
thesis, the second thesis is, ergo, I accept the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>generatio aequivoca</foreign>.
<emph>But we have no actual proof of it.</emph></q> Hence <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> only follows the
lead of others when he writes: <q>We admit that this process (<emph>primordial
genesis</emph>) must remain a pure hypothesis, as long as it is not directly
observed or duplicated by experiment. But I repeat that this hypothesis
is indispensable for the entire coherence of the history of natural
creation. Unless you accept the hypothesis of primordial genesis at
this one point in the theory of evolution, you must take refuge in the
miracle of a supernatural creation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Is this science, or is it not rather Theophobia? Does the
freedom of science consist, first of all, in the privilege of
emancipating one's self from truth, whenever truth is not to
one's taste? True, liberal science will then be free from distasteful
truths, but all the more shackled by its irreligious prejudices.
</p>

<p>
In modern times, the <emph>theory of evolution</emph> is in high favour.
<pb n='242'/><anchor id='Pg242'/>
On earth we do not only see life, but life in a great variety
of forms, from plant to man. The question, whence this
variety, admits in its turn only of the alternative: either it
was immediately created by God's hand, or it is the result of
a slow evolution from common original forms. Whether there
has been an evolution within the vegetable and animal kingdom
is a problem for natural science. But it is a philosophical
question, whether the essentially superior human soul, endowed
with spirituality and reason, could have evolved from the inferior
animal soul. Philosophy must answer: No, just as impossible
as to evolve ten from two, or a whole book from a
single proofsheet. Faith says the human soul is created by
God. We do not intend to discuss the problem here any further,
but shall only point out how science here, too, expressly or tacitly,
is determined very energetically by the presumption of the
exclusive natural causation; this is applied to the entire theory
of evolution, but especially in regard to man.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The notion of the evolution of the living world on earth,</q> thus
states <hi rend='italic'>Weismann</hi> quite significantly, <q>extends far beyond the provinces
of individual sciences, and it influences our entire range of
thoughts. This notion means nothing less than the elimination of
miracle from our knowledge of nature, and the classification of the
phenomena of life on an equal footing with the rest of natural events.</q>
The guiding motive is plainly in evidence.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The aim to eliminate the <q>miracle of creation</q> is manifested
even more conspicuously in the question about the origin
of man: man with his entire equipment, intellectual as well
as cultural, must have evolved upward from the most imperfect
rudiments; this is regarded as a self-evident proposition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>M. Hoernes</hi>, for instance, writes: <q>The Cosmogonies, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, the
theories of creation, of all nations ascribe the origin of man to a
supernatural act of creation, whereby the Creator is imagined as a
human being, because at the intellectual stage corresponding to these
notions something created could only be conceived as something formed,
something constructed.</q> Thus the theory of creation, and the Christian
doctrine of the genesis of man, is disposed of as a notion of the
lower intellect. <q>On the contrary, we are taught by science to look
upon the highest mammals as our nearest blood-relatives.</q> This <q>we
are taught by science,</q> although it is confessed: <q>We know the fact of
the existence of the man of the fourth, or glacial, period, but we have
<pb n='243'/><anchor id='Pg243'/>
not a solitary fact that would throw light upon his origin and his
previous existence.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The theory of miracles can be given up only when we shall cease
to contemplate man as a creature apart from the rest of creation, and
look upon him as a being developed within creation to what he is now.
Then, however, reason and language, as well as man himself, are the
products of a continuous evolution,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi> in his <q>Psychology of
Nations.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Müller</hi>, in a text-book on the science of language, argues:
<q>According to <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> and to modern natural science, man was not created
but has evolved from a lower organism during a process of thousands
and thousands of years.... For this reason, we must (?) assume
that the first language of primitive man could not have ranked above
the speech by which animals living in families communicate with each
other.</q>
</p>

<p>
On the basis of this truly dogmatical presumption, that the <q>miracle
theory</q> of creation must not be accepted, they proceed then to construe
one hypothesis upon another, of the origin of language, of thought, of
conscience, of religion, according to the method of <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Spencer</hi>,
hypotheses of utmost arbitrariness, and frequently most fantastic.
<q>Ethnographical researches,</q> so we are told by <hi rend='italic'>E. Lehmann</hi>, <q>made by
travellers, representatives of science and of practical life, in all parts
of the globe, ... are starting to-day, almost without exception, from
the tacit presumption that the civilization of peoples living in the primitive
state represent an early and low stage in a historical chain of
evolution.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
All these are suitable commentaries upon the trite proposition
that natural science, or more generally science, is incompatible
with religious belief. Of course research, like that
described above, does not agree with Faith. But the fault
lies in its unscientific method, rather than in its scientific
character, in its latent atheistic presumption which prevents an
unbiassed conception of truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In February, 1907, the well-known biologist and priest of the
Jesuit order, <hi rend='italic'>E. Wasmann</hi>, gave three lectures in Berlin on the theory
of evolution, before a large audience; they were followed on the fourth
evening by a discussion, in the course of which eleven opponents voiced
for nearly three hours their objections and attacks, to which <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>
replied briefly at midnight, but little time having been allotted to him
for this purpose. <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>, as well as his chief opponent, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>
of Berlin, have published the arguments on both sides with notes,
comments, and supplements. The report of Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> lays stress
upon the assertion, which had also formed the refrain of all opposing
speeches, viz., <q>the discussion has shown, in the first place, that true
research in natural science is impossible for those taking the position
of the Roman Catholic Church; secondly, the glaring and irreconcilable
<pb n='244'/><anchor id='Pg244'/>
opposition of the scientific theory of the world to the Orthodox-Christian
view was sharply manifested.</q> In examining how this was
demonstrated by this particular natural science, one meets with a
painful surprise.
</p>

<p>
Even the facts concerning the arrangements for the discussion make
an unpleasant impression. It is true, <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> accused <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi> of calumny
on account of the latter's complaint. However, upon comparing
closely the statements of both, the following facts remain undisputed.
<hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi> notified <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> that he desired to speak twice during the discussion,
and that the entire discussion should not last much over two
hours. <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> promised to arrange matters accordingly. But on the forenoon
of February 18th, the opponents held a meeting, <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> presiding,
and they resolved, without the least notification to <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>, that there
should be eleven speakers against <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>, and that the latter should
reply but once, at the end. Only just before the beginning of the
discussion, the same evening, <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> informed <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi> of the arrangement,
making it practically impossible for the latter to change the
situation. Furthermore, upon <hi rend='italic'>Plate's</hi> proposal, an intermission of five
minutes before the appearance of the tenth speaker was decided upon,
<q>in order to give those in the audience, who might find the session
too exhausting, a chance to leave.</q> Thus the audience was to be
subjected for three long hours to the influence of heated attacks on
Theism, Christianity, and the Church, and without hearing the reply
unless they held out from half-past eight in the evening to half-past
twelve in the morning.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plate's</hi> Monism rejects principally everything metaphysical: <q>Monism
is the short term for the natural science view of the world, that
rejects all preternatural and supernatural ideas.</q> Solutions, not given
by the natural sciences, simply do not exist for him; for him the sun
sets on the horizon of his natural science. <q>Natural laws comprise
all that we are able to fathom: what is behind them, or what is living
in them and operates in them, is the ultimate question for philosophy,
and there one thinks this way, another that way</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>). Nevertheless,
he knows that <q>Out of nothing can come nothing: hence matter is
eternal,</q> and he is certain that there is no personal God, no angel nor
devil, no beyond nor immortality. Whoever fails to think the same
way is no scientist, he is not even a man of sound reason: because
<q>he who has grasped even the elements of natural science, the unity
and strict conformity to law of the natural forces, and has a head
for sound reasoning, will become a monist all by himself, while the
rest are past help, anyhow.</q>
</p>

<p>
<q>The Polytheism of the orthodox Church,</q> he says further, referring
to the mystery of the Trinity, <q>is irrational</q>; for <q>Common Sense
says that 3 is not equal to 1, nor 1 to 3,</q> and this is sufficient for
<hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>. <q>Trinity, the Incarnation of the Son of God, Christ's Ascension
and His descent into hell, Original Sin, Redemption from sin by
Christ's sacrifice, Angels and Devils, the Immaculate Conception, the
Infallibility of the Pope, all these and many other doctrines of the
orthodox Church are thrown to the winds by anybody convinced of the
permanence and imperviousness of the natural laws.</q> This again is
<pb n='245'/><anchor id='Pg245'/>
sufficient for him. <q>The question whether God is personal or impersonal,</q>
says he, in another place, <q>should never be raised: it is
just as preposterous as the question whether God has eyes or not.</q>
Another of his arguments reads: <q>If the body after death can become
dust by natural means, then there must have been conditions under
which the dust became by natural means a body.</q> An analogous argument
would be: <q>If a book can of itself finally wear away into withered
and loosened leaves, then there must be conditions under which the
perfect book could originate all by itself, and without Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>, out
of withered, loose leaves.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> assures us: <q>I do not know anything about metaphysics.</q>
We do not want to dispute that. It is regrettable that so many
scientists of our times are betraying a pitiable lack of philosophical
training, a lack which becomes a social danger if they, nevertheless,
yield to the temptation to invade the domain of Philosophy. Even
the Protestant scientist <hi rend='italic'>G. Wobbermin</hi> in referring to the above-mentioned
discussion remarked: <q><hi rend='italic'>Wasmann's</hi> opponents on that
evening have betrayed without exception a really amazing lack of
philosophical training.</q> In glaring contrast with this ignorance
stands their intolerance for any different theory of the world. Because
he thinks as a Christian, <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi> is peremptorily expelled
from the ranks of natural scientists. <q><hi rend='italic'>Father Wasmann</hi> is not a
true natural scientist, he is not a true scholar.</q> With this crushing
verdict Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> concluded his speech. He repeats this finding on
the last page of his book in conspicuous type: <q><hi rend='italic'>Father Wasmann</hi>,
S. J., no true natural scientist, no true scholar.</q> That his opponent, in
answer to questions that go beyond mere natural science, is giving
philosophical replies, in accord with the doctrine of Christianity, is
explained by <q>his voluntary or involuntary submission to the Church,</q>
<q>natural science bows to Theology.</q> He therefore lacks <q>the freedom
of thought and of deduction.</q> Sophistical stunts in the service
of intolerance! But let us proceed on our way.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The compulsory dogma of the inadmissibility of a supernatural
order of the world, and of its operation in the visible
world, becomes most manifest when liberal science comes in
contact with the miracle. Forsooth, it shirks this contact. But
time and again, now and in the past, it is confronted by clearly
attested facts and it cannot avoid noticing them. However, it is
determined from the outset that miracles are impossible. Of
course, this cannot be proved except by the presumption that
there is no supermundane God. Even the agnostic <hi rend='italic'>Stuart Mill</hi>
admits that if the existence of God is conceded, an effect produced
by His will, which in every instance owes its origin to
its creator, appears no longer as a purely arbitrary hypothesis,
but must be considered a serious possibility (Essays, 1874).
<pb n='246'/><anchor id='Pg246'/>
Generally, however, liberal science does not try hard to demonstrate
in a scientific way the impossibility.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>It is my unyielding conviction,</q> so speaks <hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi>, and his
is perhaps the most telling expression of this dogmatic mood, <q>that
anything that happens within time and space is subject to the laws of
motion. Hence, that in this sense, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, of interrupting the natural
connection, there cannot be any miracles.</q> One simply does not believe
such things. <q>That a tempest at sea,</q> thus <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> again, <q>could
have been stilled by a word we do not believe, nor shall we ever again
believe it.</q> Similarly reads <hi rend='italic'>Baumgarten's</hi> declaration regarding the
resurrection of Christ: <q>Even if all the reports had been written on the
third day, and had been transmitted to us as a certainty ... nevertheless
modern consciousness could not accept the story.</q> And <hi rend='italic'>W.
Foerster</hi> writes: <q>The supposition that such interferences do not occur,
and that everything in the world is advancing steadily and in
accordance with fixed laws, forms the indispensable presumption of
scientific research.</q> And <hi rend='italic'>H. von Sybel</hi> holds <q>An absolute concord
with the laws of evolution, a common level in the existence of things
terrestrial, forms the presumption of all knowledge: it stands and
falls with it.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This is the presumption, from which is drawn the most extravagant
conclusion, which, though so manifestly improper, is
made the basis for rejecting the entire supernatural religion of
Christianity. Because God's Incarnate Son, in a small town of
Palestine, once turned water into wine, will the Christian housewife
lose her confidence in the stability of water? When it was
suddenly discovered that the orbit of the planet Uranus was
not a perfect ellipsis, as required by the law of <hi rend='italic'>Kepler</hi>, was it
thought that these deviations are impossible because there must
not be any exception to the law of perfect elliptical movements?
Happily, this law continued to be accepted without
deeming an irregularity impossible, and shortly afterwards
Neptune was discovered and found to be the cause of the disturbance.
But anything miraculous, no matter how well proven,
must be considered unacceptable by reason of such unsound
presumption. Philosophical a-priorism is superior to facts.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> tells in his work <q>De civitate Dei</q> (1. xxii. c. 8)
of a number of miracles happening in his time, of which he had
knowledge either as eye-witness or by authentical reports from eye-witnesses.
<hi rend='italic'>E. Zeller</hi> renders judgment on the historical value of the
statement as follows: <q>The narrator is a contemporary, and partly even
<pb n='247'/><anchor id='Pg247'/>
an eye-witness, of the events reported: by virtue of his episcopal office
he is particularly commissioned to closely investigate them; we know
him as a man overtowering his contemporaries in intellect and knowledge,
second to none in religious zeal, strong faith, and moral earnestness.
The wonderful events happened to well-known persons, sometimes
in the presence of big crowds of people; they were attested and
recorded by official order.</q> Hence the statement must be accepted without
objection. But must it not also be believed? is the query of an unbiassed
listener. Not in the judgment of one who is in the tyrannical
yoke of his presumptions. <q>What are we to say about it?</q> continues
<hi rend='italic'>Zeller</hi>, and finds that <q>in this unparalleled aggregation of miracles we
can after all see nothing else but a proof of the credulity of that age.</q>
The report is incontestable, but it must not be believed!
</p>

<p>
In our times <hi rend='italic'>Lourdes</hi> has become the scene of events which are
founded on facts, and the miraculous character has been proven at least
of some of them. <hi rend='italic'>Bertrin</hi>, in his <q>Histoire critique des evénéments de
Lourdes,</q> deals with the attitude of the physicians toward the miracles.
The believing physician can enter upon his investigation without prejudice:
not so the unbelieving physician and scientist, who is shackled
by his prejudice against the possibility of miracles. Of this a few
examples:
</p>

<p>
<q>How did you get cured?</q> was the question put by a physician to a
young woman who, after having suffered for four years from a suppurating
inflammation of the hip joints, complicated by caries, had a
few days previously suddenly regained her full health. Pains and
sores had disappeared. <q>By whom was I cured? By the Blessed
Virgin!</q> <q>Never mind the Blessed Virgin,</q> replied the physician.
<q>Young woman, why don't you admit that you had been assured in
advance that you would get well. You were told that, once in Lourdes,
you would suddenly rise from the box wherein you were lying. That
sort of thing happens&mdash;we call it suggestion.</q> The girl replied,
unhesitatingly, that it did not happen this way at all. Finally the
physician offered her money if she would admit having really been
cured by suggestion. The girl declined the offer.&mdash;Another girl
arrived in Lourdes, with a physician's attestation that she was a
consumptive. She is cured after the first bath. At the bureau of
verification her lungs were found to be no longer diseased. Her physician's
statement having been very brief, a telegram was sent to him
as a matter of precaution, asking him for another statement without,
however, informing him of the cure. The physician immediately wired
back: <q>She is a consumptive.</q> This was also the opinion of other
physicians who had treated the girl. The girl joyfully returns home,
and hurries to her physician, requesting him to certify to her cure.
He does so quite reluctantly. Upon reading his certificate, she discovers
that it said she had been cured, but only of a <emph>cough</emph>. The
case of consumption of his original testimonial had changed into a
cough. His dread of a miracle had induced this physician to commit a
falsehood.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Rambacher</hi>, as he relates in a pamphlet, sent the scientific treatise
on Lourdes by Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Boissarie</hi> to Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, with the request to read
<pb n='248'/><anchor id='Pg248'/>
it, in order to gain a better notion of the existence of a supernatural
world. After some urging he finally received the following reply, which
speaks volumes for the attitude of the natural scientist towards facts:
<q>With many thanks I hereby return the book by Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Boissarie</hi> on the
Great Cures of Lourdes which you sent me. The perusal of the same
has convinced me anew of the tremendous power of superstition (glorified
as <q>pious belief</q>) of naïve credulity (without critical examination),
and of contagious collective suggestion, as well as of the cunning
of the clergy, exploiting them for their gain.... The physicians,
said to testify in behalf of the <q>miracles</q> and the supernatural phenomena,
are either ignorant and undiscerning quacks, or positive
frauds in collusion with the priests. The most accurate description of
the gigantic swindle of Lourdes I know of, is that of <hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> in his well-known
novel.... With repeated thanks for your kindness ... <hi rend='italic'>Ernst
Haeckel</hi>.</q> Against all the facts in evidence this dogmatic scientist was
safely intrenched behind the stone wall of his presumptions. He knew
in advance that everything was superstition or the fraud of cunning
priests, that all physicians who certified to cures were quacks and
cheats. <hi rend='italic'>Zola's</hi> tendentious romance considered the best historical source!
Mention should be made here how this celebrated novelist dealt with
facts at Lourdes. In the year 1892, the time of the great pilgrimage,
<hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> went to Lourdes. He wanted to observe and then tell what he had
seen. An historical novel it was to be; time and again he had proclaimed
in the newspapers that he would tell the whole truth. At
Lourdes all doors were opened to him; he had admittance anywhere;
he could interview and obtain explanations at will. How he kept his
promise to report the truth may be shown by a single instance: <hi rend='italic'>Marie
Lebranchu</hi> came to Lourdes on August 20, 1892, suffering from incurable
consumption. She was suddenly cured, and never had a relapse.
One year after her cure she returned to the miraculous Grotto. The
excellent condition of her lungs was again verified. Now, what does
<hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> make of this event? In his novel the cured girl suffers a terrible
relapse upon her first return home, <q>a brutal return of the disease
which remained victorious,</q> we read in <hi rend='italic'>Zola's</hi> book. One day, the
president of the Lourdes Bureau of Investigation introduced himself
to <hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> in Paris, and asked him <q>How dare you let <hi rend='italic'>Marie Lebranchu</hi>
die in your novel; you know very well that she is alive and just as
well as you and I.</q> <q>What do I care,</q> was <hi rend='italic'>Zola's</hi> reply, <q>I think
I have the right to do as I please with the characters I create.</q> If
a romancer desires to avail himself of this privilege he certainly has
not the right to proclaim his novels as truthful historical writings, much
less may others see in such a novel the <q>most accurate description of
the events at Lourdes.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Renan</hi> at one time said: <q>Oh, if we just once might have a miracle
brought before professional scientists! But, alas! this will never
happen!</q> He borrowed this saying from <hi rend='italic'>Voltaire</hi>, with the difference
that the latter demanded God to perform a miracle before the Academy
of Sciences, as if there were need for miracles in a physical or chemical
laboratory. Those who desire in earnest to investigate miracles ought
to go where they are performed. And even there, where the eyes can
<pb n='249'/><anchor id='Pg249'/>
see them, it also takes good will to acknowledge them. In this respect
an interview is instructive which <hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> once had with an editor.
The latter asked: <q>If you were witness to a miracle, that would
occur under strictest conditions suggested by yourself, would you
acknowledge the miracle? Would you then accept the teachings of
the faith?</q> After a few moments of serious thought, <hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi> replied:
<q>I do not know, but I do not believe I would</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Bertrin</hi>). On April
7, 1875, there came to the Belgian sanctuary, Oostacker, a Flemish
labourer, by name <hi rend='italic'>Peter de Rudder</hi>, whose leg had eight years before
been broken below the knee, and who was then suffering from two suppurating
cancerous sores, that had formed at the place of the fracture
and on the foot. He suddenly was entirely cured. The case was investigated
in a most exact way. In 1900 a treatise concerning the case
was published by three physicians. <hi rend='italic'>E. Wasmann</hi> had as early as
1900 published a short extract of it in the <q>Stimmen aus Maria
Laach.</q> In February, 1907, when, at Berlin, he delivered his lectures
which were followed by a discussion, his opponents, headed by Prof.
<hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>, did not know of this article. When they learned of it, some
time afterwards, he was put under the ban because he <q>had degraded
himself to the position of a charlatan by vouching with his scientific
repute for the happening of a miraculous cure</q>; and they said <q>they
would fight him in the same way as they would fight every quack, but as
a scientist he was discarded.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> had on the evening of the discussion
asked of the assembled scientists the question: <q>Have we ever observed
anything like a suspension of the natural laws? The reply to it
is an unconditional <q>we have not</q>; consequently Theism becomes inadmissible
to the natural scientist.</q> Here, in the <hi rend='italic'>de Rudder</hi> case, is
found the required instance. But <hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi> knows, in advance of any
investigation, that it is a fairy tale, believed without critical examination.
And Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Hansemann</hi>, another opposing speaker of that
evening, subsequently sent word to <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi> that: <q>One can pretty well
judge what to think of a natural scientist who publishes such stuff.
For this reason I now declare that I shall never in future, no matter
how or where, enter into discussion of matters of natural science
with Mr. <hi rend='italic'>Wasmann</hi>.</q> When on a certain occasion <hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi> was advised
that some facts did not agree with his philosophical notions, he replied:
<q>The more pity for the facts.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The English natural scientist, <hi rend='italic'>W. Thomson</hi>, once said before
the British Society at Edinburgh: <q>Science is bound by
eternal honour to face fearlessly every problem that can be
clearly laid before it.</q> The equally famous <hi rend='italic'>Faraday</hi>, in the
name of empirical research, demands of its adherents the determination
to stand or to fall with the results of a direct
appeal to the facts in the first place, and with the strict logical
deductions therefrom in the second. In general these principles
are adhered to so long as religious notions are not encountered.
<pb n='250'/><anchor id='Pg250'/>
But as soon as these are sighted, the engine is reversed, and all
scientific principles are forgotten.
</p>

<p>
A science led by this spirit will set out to emancipate
man's moral conduct of life from God and religion. Indeed,
the first postulate of modern ethics directs that <emph>morality</emph> must
be <emph>independent of religion</emph>. That God and eternal salvation
is the end of man, the ultimate norm of his moral life, that
God's Command is the ultimate reason of the moral obligation,
and divine sanction its strongest support, it does not
want to acknowledge. Here, too, we find the principle of
natural causality in operation. <q>As in physics God's will must
not be made to serve as an explanation, so likewise in the theory
of moral phenomena. Both the natural and the moral world,
as they exist, may point beyond themselves to something transcendental.
But we cannot admit the transcendental ... a
scientific explanation will have to be wholly immanent, and
anthropological</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>). According to this approved principle
of ignoration, the supreme aim and law of a morality without
religion is <emph>man</emph>, his earthly happiness, and his culture.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Its aims, according to Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>, one of its noted champions, are:
<q>Promotion of moral life, fostering of a refined humanity, development
of a true fellow-feeling, without the religious and metaphysical notions
upon which mankind hitherto has mostly built its ethical ideals.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> was the pioneer here: <q>In so far as morality is based on the conception
of man as a free, being, it requires neither the idea of a
superior being to make him cognizant of his duties, nor any motive
but the law itself in order to observe it ... hence morality for its
own sake does not by any means need religion.</q> This is the viewpoint
of the autonomous man, who is his own law. <q>From the viewpoint
of authority,</q> so tells us <hi rend='italic'>E. von Hartmann</hi>, <q>autonomy does
not mean anything else but that in ethical matters I am for myself the
highest court without appeal.... The God, Who in the beginning spoke
to His children from a fiery cloud ... has descended into our bosom,
and, transformed into our own being, speaks out of us as a moral
autonomy.</q> <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Diis extinctis successit humanitas.</foreign>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<q>Although an individual representative of science may be a
believer in God in his private life,</q> so argues the English philosopher,
<hi rend='italic'>W. James</hi>, <q>at any rate the times have passed when
it could be said that the heavens announce to science the glory
of God, and that the heaven shows the works of His hands.</q>
<pb n='251'/><anchor id='Pg251'/>
The flight from divinity, atheism open or disguised, is the
psychological effect of the liberal principle. Free thought
aims to free man of all authority, it aims at severing from
religion his entire existence, marriage, state, schools, and likewise
science. <q>It is undeniable,</q> we hear from the lips of champions
of modern man, standing on the pinnacle of religious
liberalism, <q>that there is a certain forsakenness in this existence
of man, as compared to a life brightened by the idea
of a God,</q> but that forsakenness is not purchased too dearly,
for <q>it is the solitude of autonomy, a possession so precious
that no price for it could be too high</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Carneri</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Indeed, these modern men use even plainer language: science
is applauded for having at last freed man from God. With
<hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> principle that we cannot know anything of the supernatural,
we are told, there <q>were thrown overboard the cosmogonic
notions of the Semitic races, notions that have so severely
oppressed our science and religion, and are still oppressing them....
By this insight an idol is smashed. In a previous chapter
I called the Israelites the worshippers of abstract idols;
now, I believe, I shall be fully understood.</q> Indeed, we understand.
It means: Away with God. <q>This German metaphysics
frees us from idolatry and reveals to us the living divinity in
our own bosom</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Chamberlain</hi>).
</p>

<p>
This is the manner in which this free thought, within science
and without, is fulfilling the earnest admonition of the Psalmist:
<q>Seek ye the Lord and be strengthened: seek His face evermore</q>
(Ps. civ. 4), and it turns into irony the words: <q>This
is the generation of them that seek Him, of them that seek the
face of the God of Jacob</q> (Ps. xxiii. 6).
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head><q>I Know not Jesus Christ, His Only Begotten Son, Our
Lord.</q></head>

<p>
Where the thought of independence and of this world enslaves
the minds, and holds them captive in harsh aversion
to the supernatural, an objective judgment on the nature and
history of the Christian religion, to say nothing of the Catholic
Church, can hardly be hoped for. What may be expected is that
<pb n='252'/><anchor id='Pg252'/>
we will also meet here with a science which, with its hands
held before the eye that fears the light, wards off and combats
everything that is specifically Christian. It is to be feared only
that it will turn light into darkness regarding the view of
life, as also the doctrine and history, of the Christian religion.
</p>

<p>
Regarding the Christian view of life we need only read the
superficial and yet so arrogant discussions of Christian philosophy,
as found in <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>, or <hi rend='italic'>E. von Hartmann</hi>.
From this judicial bench the wisdom of Him, of Whom it is
said <q>And we saw His glory, full of grace and truth,</q> we see
condemned, if not even treated with subtle ridicule.
</p>

<p>
Let us for instance take <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen's</hi> presentment of the <q>View
of Life under Christianity.</q> Whoever reads it, and believes it,
to him the teaching of Jesus Christ can only be, what the Apostle
said it was to the heathens, foolishness. No longer can he have
adoration for its Founder, but rather the pity that one has for
an enthusiastic visionary devoid of any knowledge of the world
and men. The wisdom taught by Christ is distorted into a
sombre grimace, while side by side with it the conception of
life of Hellenic paganism is transfigured into a beautiful ideal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We are told there: <q>While classical antiquity saw as the task
of life the perfect development of the natural powers and talents of
man, ... Christianity with clear consciousness makes the contrary
the goal of life.</q> <q>The cultivation and exercise of intellectual faculties
was of great importance to the Greeks.... Primitive Christianity
looks upon reason and natural cognition with indifference, even with
suspicion and contempt ... indeed, natural reason and knowledge are
an obstacle for the kingdom of God. Christianity at first was indifferent,
even inimical, not only to philosophy and science, but also to art and
poetry. It cuts off not only sensual but also æsthetical gratification,</q>
because <hi rend='italic'>St. John</hi> condemned the gratification of the eyes (which means
something quite different from æsthetical gratification) Christianity
is said to reject <q>the arts of the Muses and athletics: they belong to
that sowing of the flesh of which the harvest is perdition.</q> <q>What the
Christians valued highly was not erudition and eloquence, but silence.
Silence is the first thing recommended by <hi rend='italic'>Ambrose</hi></q> (and he the great and
renowned representative of early Christian eloquence!). There is more:
<q>In the primitive view the first virtue was valour, especially valour in
war; indeed, in Greek and Latin speech the word 'virtue' meant
valour; the Christian's virtue, however, is patience and endurance. He
does not draw the sword; to him are expressly forbidden not only anger,
hatred, and private revenge, but even litigation.</q>
</p>

<pb n='253'/><anchor id='Pg253'/>

<p>
In this tendentious strain <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> continues, with exaggerations and
misrepresentations that have nothing in common with science. According
to the Greek view, he says, high-mindedness was a great virtue, but,
naturally, the Christian is not allowed to have it; <q>the virtue of the
Christian is humility,</q> <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, in <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen's</hi> sense low-mindedness; this is
<q>the starting point of Christianity.</q> True, the author assures us that
Christianity of to-day is no longer the one he is describing; it has
adapted itself more to the world. But it is sad to have this gloomy, visionary
fanaticism described to us as the one which was taught by the
words of Jesus Himself.
</p>

<p>
The adherent of this Christianity looks upon governments and their
aims as something essentially foreign to it, even to be an official
<q>would doubtless have been felt as a contradiction</q>; but a sudden
change is said to have taken place under <hi rend='italic'>Constantine</hi>. Earthly joys and
benefits, the holy ties of the family, those that Jesus in person blessed
at Cana, they were, according to <hi rend='italic'>St. Paul</hi>, so we are told, in the spirit
of Christ things to avoid and condemn.
</p>

<p>
And how are these theological discoveries proven, what sources are
quoted in substantiation? By some arbitrarily selected passages of the
Scriptures, that one must hate father and mother, wife and child,
brother and sister; that the poor in spirit are blessed, that the lust
of the eye is sinful, that evil should not be resisted; and in quoting
these passages all scientific interpretation is carefully avoided, all the
writers who have amply explained them are ignored. And what the
scriptural passages fail to prove must be demonstrated by some extreme
statement borrowed from <hi rend='italic'>Tertullian</hi>, who is generally prone to
exaggeration. As a matter of course, gloomy Christianity then seems
inferior to the brilliancy of Greek paganism; Christianity is directly
a danger to civilization; it may be good enough for those tired of life.
<q>The objection has been made that the fulfilment of this command would
destroy our entire civilization. Most probably this would be the case.
But where is it written (in Holy Writ) that our civilization must be
preserved?</q> We have here the picture formed of the doctrine of
Christ by the world, whereof the Lord has predicted: the world will
hate you. <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> admits frankly: <q>Whence this hatred? Because
the Christian despises that which to the world is the highest good.
There can be no better reason for hating any one....</q>
</p>

<p>
It is easy to understand that one who has for a long time mentally
abandoned his Christian faith, cannot carry in mind its picture as undistorted
as he did in his better days, and as would conform to reality.
But it is reprehensible to exhibit in public this picture, without having
previously and conscientiously examined the main lines, to see whether
they are not caricatures. And they are caricatures, traced by a hand
that is led by the mood of a secret anti-Christianity.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A treatment identical with that of its view of life is accorded
to the <emph>doctrine and history of the Christian religion</emph>.
Not science and uncorrupted truthfulness, but antipathy, presumption,
harsh denial of everything divine, only too often point
<pb n='254'/><anchor id='Pg254'/>
the way. Let us listen again to the author named above, since
he knows to express modern thought with a clearness and precision
almost unequalled by any one else.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It made a painful impression to find in the Christmas number, 1908,
of the liberal-theological <q>Christliche Welt</q> a posthumous article
by <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Paulsen</hi>: <q>What think you of Christ: Whose Son is He?</q> The
article was without doubt one of the last he had written. It contains
the program of modern liberal science. <q>With the seventeenth
century,</q> we read there, <q>begins the reorganization of the theory of the
universe by science. Its general tendency may be described by the formula:
Elimination of the supernatural from the natural and historical
world.</q> <q>Consequently, no miracles in history, no supernatural birth,
no resurrection, no revelation, in fact no interference by the Eternal in
temporal events.</q> Hence, the man who <q>thinks scientifically <emph>in this
wise</emph> can have no doubt that the old ecclesiastical dogma cannot be reconciled
with scientific thought.</q> This, of course, amounts to a complete
renunciation of positive Christianity.
</p>

<p>
This scientific thought, in the words of <hi rend='italic'>Baumgarten</hi>, <q>rejects any
projection of the supernatural into tangible reality</q>; especially is <q>the
metaphysical genesis and nature of the Saviour highly offensive to our
ethical consciousness,</q> even <q>absolutely unbearable.</q> The Christian
religion can no longer be permitted to overtower other religions by its
supernaturalness. <q>The distinction between a revealed and a natural
religion becomes an impossibility,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>W. Bousset</hi>. And <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi> declares:
<q>Christianity, as an <q>absolute</q> or a <q>revealed</q> religion, would
stand opposed to all other religious development, as an incommensurable
magnitude. This point of view, evidently, cannot be competent for our
speculations.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Having become the ruling mode of thought, these presumptions
determine from the outset the results to be obtained
by <q>research,</q> and they force it to violate its own method, so
that it may be dragged along the by-ways and false ways of
a mistaken, philosophical a-priorism, thereby making freedom
of science a mockery. From the abundant material at our disposal
let us take only one example, viz., the <emph>Modern Criticism
of the Gospels</emph>.
</p>

<p>
The Gospels contain many records of facts of a supernatural
character, of miracles and prophecies. That these records are
necessarily false is the first principle of the historical, or
critical, method, as it is called. <q>As a miracle of itself is unthinkable,
so the miracles in the history of Christianity, and
in the Christianity of the New Testament, are likewise unthinkable.
<pb n='255'/><anchor id='Pg255'/>
Hence, when miracles are nevertheless narrated,
these narratives must be false, in as far as they report miracles:
that is, either the relation did not happen at all, or, if it did,
there was a sufficient natural explanation</q>; <q>the historian
must under all circumstances answer, <q>No,</q> to the question
whether the report of a miracle is worthy of belief</q> (<hi rend='italic'>T. Zeller</hi>).
Thus instructed, <q>unprejudiced</q> research proceeds to construct
its results of the investigation of the genuineness, time
and date, of the writing of the Gospels and of the Acts, as
well as of their credibility. Let us see how this is done.
</p>

<p>
The tradition of the early Church, as well as intrinsic evidence,
testify that the first Gospel was really written by the
Apostle <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi>, and this certainly before the destruction of
Jerusalem. Liberal-Protestant criticism, however, assigns its
origin to a time after the year 70, chiefly for two reasons:
First, the striking prophecy of the destruction of Jerusalem,
conforming so accurately to the actual event, could have been
written only after the year 70; otherwise it would have
amounted to a real prophecy subsequently fulfilled, a conclusion
that cannot be accepted. The second reason is this: The contents
of <hi rend='italic'>St. Matthew's</hi> Gospel is already wholly Catholic, hence
it must have been written during a later, Catholic, period.
For as there can be no influences from above, and as everything
is evolved in a natural way, the principle must govern: that the
more supernatural and the more dogmas, so much later the
period in question; at first there could have been only a religion
of sentiment without dogma, which gradually developed into
Catholic dogmatism. Similar are the presumptions which direct
modern research in respect to the genuineness of the other Gospels
and the Acts. A few proofs:
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Jülicher</hi> thinks that, <q>While we cannot go prior to the
beginning of the second century, because of external testimony, we cannot
on the other hand maintain a later date. The most probable time
for our Gospel is the one shortly before the year 100....</q> Why? <q>Because
the ill-fitting feature in the parable of the wedding feast, that
the king in his wrath, because his invitation had been made light of,
sent forth his armies and destroyed those murderers and burned up
their city, could hardly have been invented before the conflagration of
Jerusalem</q>&mdash;a prophecy, namely, of the coming destruction of Jerusalem
<pb n='256'/><anchor id='Pg256'/>
cannot be admitted. <q>But to my mind, the decisive point is
found in the religious position of <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi>. Despite his conservative
treatment of tradition, he already stands quite removed from its spirit;
he has written a Catholic Gospel.... To <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi> the congregation,
the Church, forms the highest court of discipline, being the administrator
of all heavenly goods of salvation; his Gospel determines who is to
rule, who to give laws: in its essential features the early Catholicism
is completed.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Jülicher</hi> arrives at a similar conclusion in his research on <hi rend='italic'>St.
Luke's</hi> Gospel: <q>That <hi rend='italic'>Luke's</hi> Gospel was written sometime after the
destruction of Jerusalem in 70 <hi rend='smallcaps'>a.d.</hi>, is proven beyond any doubt, by xxi.
22-24, where the terrible events of the Jewish war are <q>foretold.</q>...
All arguments in favor of a later date of writing concerning <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi>
hold good also of <hi rend='italic'>Luke</hi>.</q> Even more unreserved is <hi rend='italic'>O. Pfleiderer</hi>, until
recently a prominent representative of liberal-Protestant theology at
Berlin: <q>In this Gospel we find the elements of dogma, morals, the
constitution of the developing Catholic Church. Catholic is its trinitarian
formula of christening, this embryo of the Creed and of the
apostolic symbol. Catholic is its teaching of Christ ... Catholic,
the doctrine of Salvation ... Catholic are the morals ... Catholic,
finally, is the importance attached to <hi rend='italic'>Peter</hi> as the foundation of the
Church and as the bearer of the power of the key.</q> In regard to this
latter point <hi rend='italic'>Pfleiderer</hi> remarks expressly: <q>In spite of all attempts
of Protestants to mitigate this passage (Matt. xvi. 17-20) there is no
doubt that it contains the solemn proclamation of <hi rend='italic'>Peter's</hi> Primacy.</q>
The unsophisticated reader thereupon would be likely to deduct: If
the oldest Gospel is already Catholic, then it must be admitted that
earliest Christianity was already Catholic. In so reasoning he might
have rightly concluded, but he would have shown himself little acquainted
with the method of liberal science. This infers contrariwise:
early Christianity must not be Catholic, hence the Catholic Gospel cannot
be so old, it must be the fraudulent concoction of a later time;
<q>hence the origin of the Gospel of <hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi> is to be put down not
before the time of <hi rend='italic'>Hadrian</hi>; in the fourth century rather than in the
third.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>A. Harnack</hi> fixes the date of the Gospel at shortly after 70, because
<q><hi rend='italic'>Matthew</hi>, as well as <hi rend='italic'>Luke</hi>, are presupposing the destruction of
Jerusalem. This follows with the greatest probability from Matt.
xxii. 7 (the parable of the marriage feast).</q> This is to be held also
of <hi rend='italic'>Luke's</hi> Gospel. <q>This much can be concluded without hesitation:
that, as now admitted by almost all critics, <hi rend='italic'>Luke's</hi> Gospel presupposes
the destruction of Jerusalem.</q>
</p>

<p>
Remarkable is <hi rend='italic'>Harnack's</hi> latest attitude towards the Acts; it shows
again that the results of modern biblical criticism are less the results
of historical research than of philosophical presumptions. In his <q>Acts
of the Apostles</q> <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> admits: <q>Very weighty observations indicate
that the Acts (hence also the Gospels) were already written at the
beginning of the sixties.</q> In substantiation he cites not less than
six reasons which evidently prove it: they are based upon the principles
of sound historical criticism. <q>These are opposed solely by the observation
<pb n='257'/><anchor id='Pg257'/>
that the prophecy about the catastrophe of Jerusalem in
some striking points comes near to the actual event, and that the
reports about the Apparition and the legend of the Ascension would
be hard to understand prior to the destruction of Jerusalem. It is
hard to decide.... But it is not difficult to judge on which side the
weightier arguments are</q> (viz., on the part of the contention for an
earlier date). Yet <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> is loath to accept the better scientific reasons:
they must suffer correction by presumptions. He formulates his
final decision in the following way: <q><hi rend='italic'>Luke</hi> wrote at the time of <hi rend='italic'>Titus</hi>,
or during the earlier time of <hi rend='italic'>Domitian</hi> (?), but perhaps (only <emph>perhaps</emph>,
in spite of decisive arguments) already at the beginning of the
sixties.</q> (Recently <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> recedes to the time before the destruction
of Jerusalem without, however, acknowledging a divine prophecy of
this catastrophe.) Similar is this theologian's proof that the fourth
Gospel could not have been written by <hi rend='italic'>John</hi>, the son of <hi rend='italic'>Zebedee</hi>;
because xxi. 20-23 (I will that he tarry till I come) cannot be a
prophecy, but must have been written down after the death of the
favourite disciple. <q>The section xx. 20-23 obviously presupposes the
death of the beloved disciple; on the other hand he cannot be left out
of the 21st Chapter. This 21st Chapter, however, shows no other pen
than that which had written Chapters 1-20. This proves that the
author of Chapter 21, hence the author of Chapters 1-20, could not have
been the son of <hi rend='italic'>Zebedee</hi>, whose death is there presupposed.</q> The whole
argument again rests upon the refusal to hold possible a prophecy from
the lips of Jesus.
</p>

<p>
The main reason, however, for disputing the genuineness of the
fourth Gospel, although external tradition and internal criterions
testify to it as the writing of <hi rend='italic'>St. John</hi>, is, because it teaches so clearly
the <emph>divinity of Christ</emph>: and this must be denied. Significant are, for
instance, the words in which <hi rend='italic'>Weizsäcker</hi> sums up his objections to
this gospel: <q>That the Apostle, the favorite disciple according to the
Gospel, who sat at the table beside Christ, should have looked upon and
represented everything that he once experienced, as the living together
with the incarnate divine Logos, is rather a puzzle. No power
of faith and no philosophy can be imagined big enough to extinguish
the memory of real life and to replace it by this miraculous image of
a divine being ... of one of the original Apostles, it is unthinkable.
Upon this the decision of this point will always hinge. Anything else
that may be added from the contents of the Gospel is subordinate.</q>
This means, Christ cannot be admitted to be a Divine Being&mdash;impossible.
An eye-witness could not take Him for it: therefore, this <q>miraculous
picture of a Divine Being</q> cannot have been the work of an eye-witness.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Like the <emph>genuineness</emph> of the Gospels, so is also their <emph>credibility</emph>
beyond a doubt. Two of them are written by Apostles,
the two others by Disciples of the Apostles: they also have all
the marks peculiar to writings of eye or ear witnesses, or of
persons who have heard the narratives directly from the lips of
<pb n='258'/><anchor id='Pg258'/>
eye-witnesses. Nor would any one doubt their credibility if
they did not report supernatural facts. But, this being the case,
infidel research is bound to arrive at the opposite result.
</p>

<p>
The writers were frauds&mdash;this was long ago the hypothesis
of the superficial Hamburg Professor, <hi rend='italic'>Samuel Reimarus</hi>, whose
<q>Fragments</q> were published by <hi rend='italic'>Lessing</hi>. But even to a <hi rend='italic'>D. F.
Strauss</hi> <q>such a suspicion was repulsive.</q> The Heidelberg Professor,
<hi rend='italic'>H. E. Paulus</hi>, sought his salvation in trying to reduce the
reports of miracles to a natural sense, by doing painful violence
to the text: for instance, the Lord did not walk <emph>upon</emph> the sea,
but only <emph>along</emph> the sea; the miracle of the wine at Cana was
only a wedding joke. Then came <hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi> (died 1874),
and he tried it in a different way. <q>If the Gospels are really
historical documents, then the miracle cannot be removed from
the life of Jesus.</q> Hence, it is to remain? Indeed not! The
Gospels must not be accepted as historical sources. They are
products of purposeless poetic legends, the miracles are garlands
of religious myths, gradually twined around the picture
of Jesus. Myths, however, need time for their formation,
hence <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi> fixes the date of the Gospels within
the second century. He openly admits that his hypothesis
would fall to the ground if but a single Gospel has been written
in the first century. As a fact, more recent rationalistic criticism
has found itself constrained to drop this hypothesis. <hi rend='italic'>F. Ch. Baur</hi>
(died 1860) fell back upon the fraud-hypothesis of a <hi rend='italic'>Reimarus</hi>.
It, too, has been laid among the dead. Thus they have exhausted
themselves in the attempt to shake off the burdensome
yoke of truth.
</p>

<p>
Influenced by <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Baur</hi>, and other German critics, <hi rend='italic'>E.
Renan</hi> (died 1892) wrote his <q>Life of Jesus,</q> a frivolous
romance. Quite frank are the words he wrote down in the
preface to the thirteenth edition of his <q>Vie de Jésus</q> (1883):
<q>If miracle has any reality, then my book is nothing but a
tissue of errors.... If the miracle and the inspiration of certain
books are real things, then our method is abominable.</q>
But he silences all doubts by the phrase: <q>To admit the supernatural
is alone sufficient to place one's self outside of science.</q>
</p>

<p>
The newer <q>historical-critical</q> school, while having disposed
<pb n='259'/><anchor id='Pg259'/>
of many contentions of the old schools, is nevertheless in its research
bound just as energetically by the postulate of conformity
to natural laws. The fourth Gospel is pushed aside: in the
others all miraculous occurrences are expounded away, till the
<q>historically credible core</q> is reached.
</p>

<p>
The books of the Old Testament fare even worse, if possible.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Does Genesis relate history or a legend?</q> asks Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Gunkel</hi>, and
continues: <q>this is no longer a question to the historian.</q> Well, a
legend, then. But how does the historian know this? From his own
pantheistic philosophy, which recognizes no God differing from this
world: <q>The narratives of Genesis being mostly of a religious nature,
they continuously speak of God. The way, however, in which narratives
speak of God is one of the most reliable standards to judge
whether they are meant historically or poetically. Here, too, the
historian cannot do without a world philosophy. We believe that
God acts in the world as the latent, hidden motive of all things ...
but He never appears to us as an acting factor <emph>jointly with others</emph>
(the italics are the author's), but always as the ultimate cause of all
things. Quite different in many narratives of Genesis. We are able to
understand these narratives of miracles and apparitions as the artlessness
of primitive people, but we refuse to believe them.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Analogous to Bible-criticism is the research in other branches
of theology. The <emph>origin of Christianity</emph>, this wonderful
power which so suddenly made its appearance in history and
speedily vanquished a whole world, must of course not be a
work of Heaven. Hence its origin must be explained at any
cost in a natural way, or <q>historically,</q> as they put it. The
religious notions of Christianity must not be conceded a supernatural
certainty over all other religions; and <q>to understand
an event historically means: to conceive it by its causal connection
with the conditions of a given place and at a certain
time of the human life. Hence science cannot consider such a
thing as the appearance of a supernatural being upon the
earth</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Pfleiderer</hi>).
</p>

<p>
And then they proceed to show that Christianity is a natural,
evolutionary product of the Israelite religion, of Greek philosophy,
of Oriental myths, and Roman customs. That it is far
superior to all these, and that it is the opposite to them in
various ways, is carefully hushed up. The inadequacy and impossibility
of such an explanation is adroitly concealed. Nor
<pb n='260'/><anchor id='Pg260'/>
could the Israelite religion of the Old Covenant, according to
the naturalistic principle of liberal theology, have had its
origin in revelation and the prophets; hence it comes from
Babylon, as the product of natural evolution from Oriental myths
and customs. Any old and new analogies, hypotheses, and fancies
are good enough then to demonstrate this as <q>historical.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Truth is not in Them.</head>

<p>
We pause here. We might thus continue for a long time; but
it is enough. The patient reader, who has accompanied us on
the tedious way to this point, may begin to feel tired. May
he excuse the detailed recital for the reason that we had to do
some extensive reconnoitring, through the precincts of modern
philosophical-religious research, to avoid the reproach that we
were making accusations without furnishing proofs. Our contention
was, that liberal science is trying to shake off the yoke
of religious truth, and to explain it away by its self-made presumptions.
We believe that we have proved our contention.
</p>

<p>
We are confronted by a science that boasts of monopolizing the
spirit of truthfulness; as a matter of fact, we see that it uses
all scientific devices to shirk the truth and to disguise its effort.
In loquacious protests it rejects the <q>rigid dogmatism,</q> the
<q>fixed views,</q> of the Christian faith, and it proclaims experience
and reason as the sole criterions of scientific cognition;
yet it always stands upon the platform of rigid presumptions,
that are derived from no experience, and which no reason
can prove. It clamours for research free from presumption,
and, without winking an eye, substitutes its own presumption,
secretly or openly. It is <emph>dishonest</emph>.
</p>

<p>
It promises to preserve for man the highest ideals and blessings
for which his mind is yearning, yet it has no religion and no God.
It recalls to mind the words spoken by <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> of the philosophers
whom he had followed in the false ways of his youth:
<q>They said: truth, and always truth, and talked much of truth,
but it was not in them.... Oh, truth, truth, how deeply my inmost
spirit sighed after thee, while they filled my ears incessantly
with thy bare name and with the palaver of their bulky volumes.</q>
<pb n='261'/><anchor id='Pg261'/>
Free it wants to be, this science. One of its disciples boasted:
<q>It has taught its disciples to look down without dizziness from
the airy heights of sovereign scepticism. How easy and free one
breathes up there!</q> Aye, it has made itself free,&mdash;from the
yoke of unpalatable truth. So much more firmly is it fettered,
not with the holy bonds of belief in God, but by the more burdensome
mental yoke of a disbelief that weakens and blinds the
eyes against the cognition of the higher truth:&mdash;and bound by
the chains of public opinion, which threatens anathema to every
one who fails to stop at the border of the natural. Truly free
is only the science that enjoys a clear and free perception for
the truth. Unfree is a science that restrains the mental eye with
the blinkers of theophoby. Our age seeks for the lost happiness
of the soul, it seeks longingly God and the supernatural that have
been removed from its sight. But science, so often its leader,
loathingly dodges God, and refuses to fold the hands and pray.
As long as our age does not break with a science that refuses
to know a God and a Saviour, so long will it hopelessly grope
about without result, and look in vain for an escape from the
wretched labyrinth of doubt.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='262'/><anchor id='Pg262'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. The Unscientific Method.</head>

<p>
The efforts of liberal science, to remove more and more
from its scope the supernatural powers, show clearly that
man may feel the truth to be a yoke, and that he may attempt
to free himself from this yoke by opposing the truth and by
substituting postulates for knowledge. Sceptical, autonomous
subjectivism, the philosophy of liberal free thought, has changed
the nature of human reasoning, and its relation to truth, and
perverted it to its very opposite. No longer is the human mind
the vassal of Queen Truth, as <hi rend='italic'>Plutarch</hi> put it, but the autocratic
ruler who degrades truth to the position of a servant. Thus
liberal freedom of thought becomes the principle of an unscientific
method, because it loses, by false reasoning and false truth,
the first condition of solid and scientific research; furthermore,
by treating the highest questions with consequent levity, it
betrays a lack of earnestness which again renders it unfit for
scientific research in serious matters.
</p>

<div>
<head>False Reasoning.</head>

<p>
<q>The philosophical thinkers of to-day,</q> says an admirer of
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>A. Sabatier</hi>, <q>may be divided into two classes, the pre-Kantian
and those who have received their initiation and their
philosophical baptism from <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> Critic.</q>
</p>

<p>
The Christian philosophy of a <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi>, which is, as even
representatives of modern philosophy are constrained to admit,
<q>a system carried out with clear perception and great sagacity</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>), contains many a principle, the intrinsic merit of
which will be fully appreciated only when contrasted with the
experiments of modern philosophy. An instance is the principle
of the old school, that cognition is the likeness of that
<pb n='263'/><anchor id='Pg263'/>
which is cognized. Apart from the cognition by sense, we are
given here the only correct principle, coinciding with the general
conviction that reasoning is the mental reproduction of an
objective order of existence, independent of us, even in our conception
of the metaphysical world. Thinking does not create
its object, but is a reproduction of it; it is not a producer, but
a painter, who copies the world with his mental brush within
himself, sometimes only in the indistinct outlines of indefinite
conception, often, however, in the sharp lines of clear cognition.
</p>

<p>
If, according to its nature, thinking is subject to standards
and laws given it by an objective world, then subjective arbitrariness,
a method of thought which, while pretending to be a
free producer of truth, yet determines it according to necessity or
desire; and, even more so, a method of thought which feels itself
justified to hold an opinion upon the same question in one way
to-day, and another and entirely opposite one to-morrow, is wholly
incomprehensible: just as incomprehensible as if a draughtsman,
attempting to draw a true picture of St. Peter's Church,
would not follow the reality but prefer to draw the picture at
random, according to his fancy and mood.
</p>

<p>
We have stated these fundamental principles already at the
beginning of our book, we have also set forth how greatly liberal
freedom of thought is lacking the first presumption of any
proper science, namely, the clear perception that there is an
objective truth in philosophical-religious questions, to which
we must submit, there, in fact, most of all.
</p>

<p>
No! We also want autonomy of thought, especially in questions
of metaphysics, where, anyway, there can only be postulates!
so shouted <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> to the modern world on the threshold
of the nineteenth century. There are no stable truths, everything
is relative and changing, adds the modern theory of evolution.
At last there is freedom for thought and research, freedom
from the yoke of absolute truth! Behold the aberrations
of an unbridled rush for freedom which moves the world of
to-day. This unruly hankering for a freer existence than
allowed by their nature and position, makes unbearable to many
modern children of man the idea of iron laws of truth and
marked boundaries of thought. Revelling in the consciousness
<pb n='264'/><anchor id='Pg264'/>
of their sovereign personality, they want to measure all things
by their individuality, even religion, philosophy, truth, and
ethics. Only that what is created and experienced by them
within the sanctuary of their personality, only what is made important
and legitimate by their sentiment, is truth and of value
to them. <emph>Autonomism</emph> thus changes unnoticeably into <emph>individualism</emph>;
the own individuality, in its peculiar inclinations,
moods, and humours, its exigencies and egotistical aims, its infirmities
and diseases&mdash;they have, under the name of <emph>individual
reason</emph>, become the law of thinking and reasoning.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Without Knowledge of the Human Nature.</head>

<p>
<q>Varied, according to character, are the demands made by
heart and mind,</q> assures us a representative of modern philosophy,
<q>corresponding to them is the image of the world to which
the individual turns by inner necessity. He may waver hither
and thither, uncertain as to himself; at last, however, his innermost
tendency of life will prevail and press him into the view
of the world corresponding to his individuality. Upon its
further development worldly and local influences will play a
very important part. But the deciding factor in giving the
direction is personality.</q> <q>And,</q> continues Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Adickes</hi>, <q>the
sharper and more one-sided a character type is brought to expression,
the more it will be urged into a certain metaphysical
or religious tendency, and this man will find no rest, nor feel
himself at home in the world, until he has found the view of life
that fits him. Nor does man assemble his metaphysics with discrimination
on the grounds of logical necessity, choosing here,
rejecting there, but it grows within himself by that inner compulsion
identical with true freedom.</q> Hence, not unselfish
yielding to truth, no, the inclinations of heart and mind, the
<q>personality</q> must form the view of the world. Let every
type of character therefore develop itself sharply and one-sidedly,
let every one get the view of the world corresponding
to himself, without regard to objective truth and logical necessity.
This precisely is the <q>true freedom.</q> <q>For when is a
man more free, than when he chooses and does&mdash;without any
<pb n='265'/><anchor id='Pg265'/>
compulsion, even resisting compulsion&mdash;what his innermost
soul is urging him to choose and do? How could he be more
true to himself, more like himself?</q> With such a freedom
<q>the outer compulsion</q> of an absolute truth, to say nothing of
the duty to believe, will not agree. <q>The core of one's very
being,</q> so <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> informs us, <q>should be grasped in its depths,
and the soul should only know its own needs and the way indicated
by it to gratify them.</q> <q>According to my character,</q>
says <hi rend='italic'>Adickes</hi> again, <q>is the world reflected within myself by
intrinsic necessity just as my creed represents it, and no opponent
is able to shake my position by arguments of reason or
by empirical facts.</q>
</p>

<p>
Hence it is not only true, as has been known from the beginning,
that the inclinations of the heart are trying to prevail
upon reason to urge their desires, and to oppose what displeases
them, and that reason must beware of the heart&mdash;no, inclination
and character are now directly called upon to shape our
religion and view of the world. Every type of man, every period,
may construct its own philosophical system, or, if this is beyond
it, at least its own ideas; it may also shape its own
Christianity, according to its experience. As the individual
chooses his clothes, and puts his individuality into them, in like
manner may the individual put on the view of life that fits him.
</p>

<p>
These principles represent the apostasy from objective truth,
and, at the same time, the apostasy from the <emph>principles of true
science</emph>: their first demand, the proper understanding of truth,
is perverted into its very opposite. A necessary quality of scientific
research is exactness; exactness, however, demands most
conscientious cleaving to truth; scale and measure are its instruments.
The reverse of exactness is to cast away scale and
measure, to turn eye and ear, not toward reality, but toward
one's self, so as to observe personal wishes and inclinations, and
then shape the results of the <q>research</q> accordingly. This may
be a method of freedom, but it cannot be the method of science.
The very thing that true research would eliminate in the first
place, viz., to have the decision influenced by hobbies and moods,
is most important in the method of individualism; objectiveness,
deemed by true science the highest requirement, is to that method
<pb n='266'/><anchor id='Pg266'/>
the least one: what true science first of all insists on, namely,
to prove that which is claimed, this method knows but little of.
It recalls the method of the gourmet who selects that which
gratifies his taste: it may be likened to the dandy picking frock-coat
and trousers that suit his whim. True research, with a
firm hand at the helm, aims to direct its craft so as to discover
new coasts, or at least a new island; the exploring done by
liberal research is like casting off the rudder to be tossed by
the waves, for its task is only to hold to the course which the
waving billows of individual life give to it. True science,
finally, seeks for serious results, able to withstand criticism: the
research by individualism produces results which, as individualism
itself confesses, must not be taken seriously. They are
the subjective achievements of amateurs, creations of fashion,
cut to the pattern of the ruling principle: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>nihil nisi quod
modernum est</foreign>. A science that professes such a method is beyond
a doubt unfit to play a beneficial part in the endeavour
of mankind.
</p>

<p>
Do not say: but it is not claimed that religion and view of life
are matters of scientific research: on the contrary, they are
always distinguished from science. It is true, this is not infrequently
claimed. But it is also known how energetically just
these matters are appropriated by science. Is it not exactly
this sphere in which free research is to be active? Is it not
its aim to construct a <q>scientific view of the world,</q> as opposed
to the Christian belief? Is there not the conviction that
science has already carried much light and enlightenment into
this very sphere, that it has upset the old tenets of faith?
</p>

<p>
And what an amount of <emph>ignorance of human nature</emph> underlies
these principles! It is the same complete misconception
that has always characterized liberalism, and which it has also
manifested in economical matters. There, too, it demanded
boundless freedom for all economic sources, ignoring man's disordered
inclinations that will work disorder and destruction if
not restrained by laws. In a similar manner they dream that
man, if left to the unrestrained influence of his personality, will
soar without fail to the heights of the pure truth. They know no
longer the maxim once engraved by the wisdom of the ancient
<pb n='267'/><anchor id='Pg267'/>
world upon Delphi's sanctuary: <q>Know thyself</q>! They no
longer know the beguiling and benumbing influence exerted
upon reason by inclination, how it fetters the mind. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amor
premit oculos</foreign>, says Quintilian. The thing we like, we desire to
establish as true; favourable arguments are decisive, counter
arguments are ignored or belittled, inclinations guide the observation,
determine the books and sources drawn from. If we meet
with something unsympathetic, something that interferes with
the liberties we have grown fond of, it takes a rare degree of unselfishness
to love the painful truth more than one's self. It is
easy to leave cool reason in control in mathematical speculations:
they seldom affect the heart; quite different, however, in
questions of philosophy and religion that often have vexatious
consequences.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We have to concede that <hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi> was right when he wrote:
<q>He who writes about the Rulers of Nineveh or the Pharaohs of Egypt,
may pursue a purely historical interest: but Christianity is a power
so alive, and the question of what occurred at its origin is involved
in such vast consequences for the immediate present, that the inquirer
would have to be dull-witted to be interested only in a purely historical
way in the solution of these questions.</q> But we must also regret
that this personal interest has misled him, for one, into pernicious ways.
</p>

<p>
In view of the frequent assurances of the noted historian, <hi rend='italic'>Th.
Mommsen</hi>, that he hates the sight of old Christian inscriptions<note place='foot'>Compare Corpus Inscriptionum Latinarum XI (1883, vii.).</note>
we may perhaps welcome it in the interest of history that he refrained
from writing the fourth volume of his Roman history, wherein the
Origin of Christianity was to be treated. One of his biographers asserts
that the downfall of paganism through Christianity was a fact not to
<hi rend='italic'>Mommsen's</hi> liking, that <q>a description of the decomposition of all
things ancient, and the substitution therefor of the Nazarene spirit
would not have been a labour of love.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>L. M. Hartmann</hi>, Theodor Mommsen (1908), 81. The author of
the biography is a Jew. There is a much-circulated story, alleged to
come from <hi rend='italic'>F. X. Kraus</hi>. <hi rend='italic'>Mommsen</hi> is said to have told <hi rend='italic'>Kraus</hi>, inasmuch
as neither the origin, nor nature, nor the spread of Christianity can
be explained by natural causes, and since he, in his capacity of historian,
could never acknowledge anything supernatural, therefore the
fourth volume will remain unwritten.</note> And again, when we see the
well-known historian of philosophy, <hi rend='italic'>F. Ueberweg</hi>, in a letter to <hi rend='italic'>F. A.
Lange</hi>, denouncing from the bitterness of his heart <q>the miserable beggar-principle
of Christianity,</q> and the <q>surrendering of independence
and of personal honour in favour of a servile submission to the master,
<pb n='268'/><anchor id='Pg268'/>
who is made a Messiah, nay, even the incarnate <emph>Son of God</emph>,</q> then we
may well dread the historical objectivity of a man of such notions in
writing about the religion of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
With reference to the chief subject of psychology, the noted psychologist,
<hi rend='italic'>W. James</hi>, writes with utmost frankness: <q>The soul is an
entity, and truly one of the worst kind, a scholastic one, and something
said to be destined for salvation or perdition. As far as I am concerned,
I must frankly admit that the antipathy against the particular
soul I find myself burdened with, is an old hardness of heart, which I
cannot account for, not even to myself. I will admit that the formal
disposition of the question in dispute would come to an end, if the existence
of souls could be used for an explanatory principle. I admit
the soul would be a means of unification, whereas the working of the
brain, or ideas, show no harmonizing efficacy, no matter how thoroughly
synchronical they be. Yet, despite these admissions, I never resort in
my psychologizing to the soul.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
If we read such statement, if, in addition, we remember the
popular-philosophical science of men like <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, particularly
perhaps the literature which he recommends for information
about Christianity, and of which he himself makes use; if we have
read <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>, or the <q>Philosophy of Races</q>
of a <hi rend='italic'>Chamberlain</hi>,&mdash;we can no longer be at a loss what to think
of the <q>rule of reason</q> and of the <q>search for pure truth.</q>
Observe, also, the restless haste of those who, having turned
their back upon the Catholic Church, now proceed to attack her,
observe their agitated work and incitement, how they rummage
and ransack the nooks and corners of the history of the Church
in quest of refuse and filth, and if the find is not sufficient how
they even help it along by forgery, all this to demonstrate to the
world that the grandest fact in history is really absurdity and
filth;&mdash;then one will understand what instincts may be found
there to guide <q>reason and science.</q> How even sexual impulses
are trying to shape their own ethics we shall not examine
here. <hi rend='italic'>F. W. Foerster</hi> relates: <q>I once heard a moral pervert
expound his ethical and religious notions; they were nothing
but the reflection of his perverse impulses. But he thought
them to be the result of his reasoning.</q> Is there not known
in these days the inherited disorder of the human heart as
characterized by the Apostle in the words: <q>But I see another
law in my members, fighting against the law of my mind, and
captivating me in the law of sin (Rom. vii. 23)</q>? The Ancients
<pb n='269'/><anchor id='Pg269'/>
knew it. The wisdom of <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> knew it, who speaks of the
<q>pricks of sin, sunk into man, coming from an old, unexpiated
offence, giving birth to wickedness.</q> The wise <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi> knew of it:
<q>Nature has bestowed upon us but a few sparks of knowledge,
which, corrupted by bad habits and errors, we soon extinguish,
with the result that the light of nature does nowhere appear
in its clearness and brightness.</q> Truth is often disagreeable to
nature. And if not subdued and ruled by strong discipline,
nature proceeds to oppose the truth. Only to lofty self-discipline
and purity of morals is reserved the privilege of facing the
highest truths with a calm eye. <q>Blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God.</q>
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Mental Bondage.</head>

<p>
Of this wisdom the admirer of liberal freedom knows little.
Instead of distinguishing the good from the evil in man, of
unfolding his inner kernel, the pure spirit, and making it rule;
instead of demanding, like <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, discipline as a preparatory
school for wisdom, he has learned from <hi rend='italic'>Rousseau</hi>, the
master of modern Liberalism, that everything in man is good.
Depravity of nature, original sin, are unsympathetic things to
his ear. Even <hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi> wrote to <hi rend='italic'>Herder</hi>, when <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> had in his
religious philosophy found a radical Evil in man: <q>After it
has taken <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> a lifetime to clean his philosophical gown of
many filthy prejudices, he now outrageously slabbers it with
the stain of the radical Evil, so that Christians, too, may be
enticed to come and kiss the seam.</q> Instead of exhorting for
a redemption from internal fetters, as the sages of all ages
did, the principle of wisdom now proposed is to quietly let
individuality develop, with all its inclinations. They call this
freedom. Is it not the freedom whereof the slave of sensuality
avails himself to form his theory of life? It, too, <q>grows up in
man with that inner compulsion which is identical with true
freedom</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Adickes</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Freedom this may be. But <emph>only external freedom</emph>, the only
freedom they often know. They are unaware that they forfeit
thereby the real, the inner freedom. <q>Thou aimest at free
heights,</q> admonishes even the most impetuous herald of freedom,
<pb n='270'/><anchor id='Pg270'/>
<q>thy soul is athirst for stars. But also thy wicked impulses
are athirst for freedom. Thy wild hounds want to be
free, they bark joyfully in their kennel when thy spirit essays
to throw open all dungeons.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>, <q>Thus spoke Zarathustra.</q></note> They think to be free and speak
of the self-assurance of individual reason, and they cannot see
that the mind is in the fetters of bondage.
</p>

<p>
Else how is it that the atheistic free science, considered in
general, arrives with infallible regularity at results that obviously
tend to a morally loose conduct of life? How is it, that
it tries throughout to shirk the acceptance of a personal God,
and is at home only in open or disguised atheism? that it so
persistently avoids the acceptance of anything supernatural?
Why does it in its researches never arrive at theism, which has
as much foundation at least as pantheism and atheism? Why
does it, nearly without exception, deny or ignore the personal immortality
of the soul and a Beyond; why does it never reach
the opposite result which, in intrinsic evidence, ranks at least
on a par with it? Why is it not admitted, that the will is free
and strictly responsible for its acts, although this fact is borne
out by the obvious experience and testimony of mankind? Why
does it so regularly arrive at the conclusion that the Christian
religion has become untenable, and needs development; that its
ethics, too, must be reformed, more especially in sexual matters?
Why does it not defend the duty to believe, but reject it persistently?
A striking fact! The matters in question here concern
truths that impose sacrifices upon man, whereas their
opposites have connections of intimate friendship with unpurged
impulses. It may be noted also that this same science,
that announces to the world these results of research, meets with
the boisterous applause from the elements that belong to the
morally inferior part of mankind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> prays: <q>Redeem me, O God, from the throng of
thoughts, which I feel so painfully within my soul, which feels lowly
in Thy presence, which is fleeing to Thy mercy. Grant me that I
may not give my assent to them; that I may disapprove of them, even
if they seek to delight me, and that I may not stay with them in
sleepiness. May they not have the power to insinuate themselves into
<pb n='271'/><anchor id='Pg271'/>
my works; may I be protected from them in my resolution, may my
conscience be protected by Thy keeping.</q> It is the realization of the
want of freedom of the human reason, the only way to the liberation
from the fetters of our own imperfection. He, who has seriously begun
to take up the struggle with his inner disorders, will, by his own experience,
pray as <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> prayed.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Recognizing this fact, man will try to rise above himself, to
cleave to a superior Power and Wisdom, who, in purer heights,
untouched by human passions, holds aloft the truth, in order to
rise thereby above his own bondage; he will understand the
necessity of an authority clothed with divine power and dignity,
so that it may hold in unvanquished hands the ideal against
all onslaughts of human passions. He will without difficulty
find this power in the religion of Jesus Christ and in His
Church: in Him, who could not be accused of sin, who by
His Cross has achieved the highest triumph over flesh and sin,
who has surrounded His Church with the bright throng of
saints. And if he sees this religion and Church an object of
persecution, he will behold in it the signature of its truth. For
truth is a yoke despised by sensualism and pride, and the spiritual
power that contends for purity and truth will be hated.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Without Earnestness.</head>

<p>
The regrettable conception of truth proper to the modern
freedom of thought, leads to that flippancy with which our
time is prone to treat the highest questions. Why conscientiousness
and anxious care? All that is needed is to form one's
personal views; there is no certain, generally valid, truth in
religious matters. Hence there is often in this sphere of scientific
research a method wholly different from that in use anywhere
else. In history, philology, natural science, there is a
striving for exactness, but in these matters exact reasoning is
replaced only too often by discretionary reasoning, by loose
forming of ideas; in the very domain which has ever pre-eminently
been called the province of the wisdom of life, there
is now in vogue the method of flippancy.
</p>

<p>
True wisdom is convinced that reason has not been given
<pb n='272'/><anchor id='Pg272'/>
to man to grope in the dark in respect to the most momentous
questions of life; that reason, though limited and liable to err,
is given him to find the truth. True wisdom knows its difficulties
when the matter in quest is metaphysical truth: it knows
how, in this case, more than in any other, reason is exposed
to the influence of inclinations from within, and to the power
of error and of public opinion from without; that in these
matters, least of all, reason is not in the habit of taking the
truth by assault. True, there are intuitions, and inspiration by
genius&mdash;they have their rights, but they are the exceptions.
The ordinary, and only safe, way is to advance cautiously, by
discoursive thinking, from cognition to cognition, otherwise
there is danger of a sudden fall from the steep path.
</p>

<p>
In the early Christian ages this insight led to careful cultivation
and application of certain methodical means of thinking
and terms of expressions, to definitions, distinctions, and forms
of syllogism, with that <q>insulting lucidity,</q> in the words of
a modern philosopher, which gives to them the stamp of scrupulousness.
The same insight into the cognitive weakness of
reason leads to the noble union between science and modesty.
</p>

<p>
What, however, do we see in modern philosophic-religious
thinking? Often unsolidity, with hardly a remnant of the
principles of the serious pursuit of knowledge.
</p>

<p>
The autonomous freethinker of these days lacks chiefly humility
and modesty. The ancient Sage of Samos once declined
the name of <q>sage,</q> saying that God alone is wise, while man
must be content to be wisdom-loving (φιλόσοφος). Not always
so the sages of modern times.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> believed of his system: <q>Critical philosophy must be convinced
that there is not in store for it a change of opinions, no
improvement nor possibly a differently formed system, but that the system
of criticism, resting on a fully assured basis, will be established
forever, indispensable for all coming ages to the highest aims of mankind.</q>
<hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi>, in turn, was no less convinced of the indispensability of
his doctrine. In the summer term of 1820 he began his lectures with
the words: <q>I would say with Christ: I teach the truth, and I am
the truth.</q> Yet, to <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi> <hi rend='italic'>Hegel's</hi> philosophy is nonsense, humbug,
and worse. <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi> knew better, and was convinced that
he had lifted the veil of truth higher than any mortal before him;
he claimed that he had written paragraphs <q>which may be taken to
<pb n='273'/><anchor id='Pg273'/>
have been inspired by the Holy Ghost.</q> Shortly before his death he
wrote: <q>My curse upon any one, who in reprinting my works shall
knowingly make a change; be it but a sentence, or a word, a syllable
or a punctuation point.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> held: <q>I have given to the world
the most profound book in its possession.</q> To the eyes of this philosophy,
modesty and humility are no longer virtues. <hi rend='italic'>B. Spinoza</hi>, a leader
in later philosophy, states expressly: <q>Humility is no virtue; it does
not spring from reason. It is a sadness, springing from the fact that
man becomes aware of his impotence.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
An arrogant mind is not capable of finding the higher truth
with certainty; conscientious obedience to truth, unselfish abstention
from asserting one's ego, and one's pet opinion, can
dwell only in the humble mind. Here applies what <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>
said of the Neoplatonists: <q>To acquiesce in truth you
need humility, which, however, is very difficult to instil into
your minds.</q><note place='foot'><q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Veritati ut possetis acquiescere, humilitate opus erat, quae civitati,
vestrae difficillime persuaderi potest</foreign></q> (De civit. Dei, X, 29).</note>
</p>

<p>
When God's authority steps before scientists and earnestly demands
faith, they will talk excitedly about their human dignity
that does not permit them to believe; about reason being
their court of last resort that must not know of submission;
and if the Church, in the name of God, steps before them, they
become abusive.
</p>

<p>
Men who have scarcely outgrown their minority often feel it
incumbent upon themselves to furnish humanity with new
thought and to discard the old. <hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi>, a young under-master
of twenty-seven years, writes his <q>Life of Jesus, critically
analyzed</q> (1835); he tells the Christian world that everything
it has hitherto held sacred is a delusion and a snare; he
feels the vocation to <q>replace the old, obsolete, supernatural,
method of contemplating the history of Jesus with a new one,</q>
which changes all divine deeds into myths. Hardly out of
knickerbockers and kilts, they feel experienced enough to come
forth with novel and unheard-of propositions on the highest
problems. In business and office, as in public service, sober-mindedness
and maturity are demanded; but to work out the ultimate
questions of humanity, inexperience and lack of the deeper
knowledge of life do not disqualify in our time. If <hi rend='italic'>Schiller's</hi>
<pb n='274'/><anchor id='Pg274'/>
complaint of the Kantians of his time was that, <q>What they
have scarcely learned to-day, they want to teach to-morrow,</q> what
is to be said of those who teach even before they have learned?
And what superficial thinking do we meet in the philosophy of
the day! Lacking all solid training, they proceed to construct
new systems, or at least fragments of them. As regards their
competence, one is often tempted to quote the harsh words of
a modern writer: <q>I believe <hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi> would have formed
a better opinion of the human intellect, had he paid less attention
to authors and newspaper-writers, and more to the common
sense evinced by men in their work and business</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
</p>

<p>
It would be highly instructive to take a longer journey
through the realm of modern philosophy, in so far as it touches
upon questions concerning the theory of the world, or even
liberal Protestant theology, so as to subject to a searching criticism
the untenable notions and attempts at demonstration
even of acknowledged representatives of this science, whereby
they generally do away with God and miracles, the soul and immortality,
freedom of the will, the divine moral laws, the
Gospel, the divinity of Christ, and so much more, and show
what they offer in place of all this. It would disclose an enormous
lack of scientific method: instead of assured results they
offer questionable, even untenable theories; in place of proofs,
emphatical assertions, imperatives, catch phrases; or else arguments
which under the simplest test will prove miscarriages of
logic. These philosophers vault ditches and boundaries with
ease, and derive full gratification from imperfect and warped
ideas. Of course, exactness in philosophical thinking is not a
fruit to be plucked while out taking a walk; it is the product
of serious mental work, of sterling philosophical training,
which, alas, is wanting to-day in large circles of scientists.
</p>

<p>
As an instance, we point to the method described in a previous
chapter, by which all supernatural factors are rejected by
the arbitrary postulate of <q>exclusively natural causation,</q> without
valid proofs, based only upon the arbitrary decision of so-called
modern science&mdash;in the gravest matter an unscientific
process that cannot be outdone.
</p>

<pb n='275'/><anchor id='Pg275'/>

<p>
Another instructive instance, of serious matters treated with
levity, is furnished in the unscrupulous way in which the Catholic
Church, her teaching, institutions, and history, are passed
upon in judgment by those having neither knowledge nor
fairness.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Without Reverence.</head>

<p>
True wisdom accepts advice and guidance. It feels reverence
for sacred and venerable traditions, for the convictions of mankind
on the great questions of life, and greater reverence still
for an authority of faith that has received from God its warrant
to be the teacher of mankind, and which has stood the test of
time. True wisdom is convinced that continuity in human
thinking and in knowledge is necessary. Life is short, and
gives to the individual hardly time to attain mental maturity.
Philosophy, and this is the matter before us at present,&mdash;philosophy
can never be the work of a single person; it is the
achievement of centuries; succeeding generations, with searching
eye and careful hand, building further upon the achievement for
which past ages have laid the foundations. By nailing together
beams and boards the individual may erect a house good enough
for a short time to serve his sports and pleasures; and if wrecked
by the first storm, it may be replaced by another. But the building
of massive and towering cathedrals that last for ages required
the work of generations. And only skilful and experienced
hands may do the work; haste is out of place here. The ancient
sages of Greece, <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, had this
reverence for the philosophical and religious traditions of the
past. These representatives of true wisdom did not consider
philosophy and theology as the product of individual sagacity,
they did not attempt to be free rulers in the realm of thought;
on the contrary, they looked upon wisdom as the patrimony of
the past, which it was their duty to preserve.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
They pointed to their venerable traditions, however meagre they
were. <q>Our forefathers,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, <q>who were better than we are,
and stood nearer to the gods than we, have handed down to us this
revelation.</q><note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, Phil. 6 c. Similarly <hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>.</note> That the testimony of the great sages, to the effect
<pb n='276'/><anchor id='Pg276'/>
that the most essential elements of their philosophy had their origin
in religious traditions, is based upon truth and not on fancy has been
proven by <hi rend='italic'>O. Willmann</hi>, whose knowledge of ancient civilization was
very extensive, in his monumental <q>History of Idealism.</q> Delhi, the
home of mysteries, the generations of priests in ancient Egypt, the doctrinal
traditions of the Chaldeans, the Magi of Medes and Persians, and
the wisdom of the Brahmins of ancient India are witnesses to the fact.
<q>The Ancients were correct,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Willmann</hi>, <q>in tracing their philosophy
to earliest traditions ... they knew what they owed to their forefathers
better than we do. They direct our astonished eyes to a very
ancient reality, to a towering remoteness of living thought.</q> This fact
is very much against the taste of our times.... An inherited wisdom,
springing from an original revelation, adapted to the nations, shining
with renewed brightness in true philosophy, is quite the opposite to a
philosophy that seeks the source of mental life only in isolated thinking;
that thinks its success to be conditioned upon unprepossession;
that holds the refutation of tradition to be the test of its strength.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Unfortunately this latter view is widespread in our time.
Research is often directed, not by reverence for the wisdom
inherited from many Christian centuries, but by the mania,
unwise and fatal alike, of seeking new paths. <q>Love of truth,</q>
so we are told, <q>is what urges on the great leaders of humanity,
the prophets and reformers, to seek new and untrodden paths
of life. <q>Plus ultra</q> is the rallying-cry of these pathfinders
of the future, who are clearing the way for the mental life of
mankind. No authority can restrain them, no prejudice, however
holy: they are following the light which has dawned upon
their soul</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
</p>

<p>
And a multitude discover this light in their souls, and join
the prophets and pathfinders! Everybody goes abroad looking
for untrodden paths; from all directions comes the cry:
Here and there, to the right, to the left, is the right way! Do we
not only too often see self-willed and self-satisfied thinkers,
whose shortsighted conceit gets within the four walls of their
study puffed up against God and religion, offer us for holy
truth the fanciful products of their narrow brains? Do we
not see, only too often, champions of shallow reasoning, without
discipline of thought and without ethical maturity, recommending
their undigested efforts as the wisdom of the world?
Youthful thinkers there are in numbers, each of whom claims
that he at last has succeeded in solving the world riddle; they
<pb n='277'/><anchor id='Pg277'/>
offer us new theories of the world, new ideas on ethics, on
law and theology, for a few dollars per copy or less. The holy
abode of truth has become the campus for saunterers, each
eager to displace the other so that he may be sole proprietor,
or at least a respected partner. Day by day new solutions
of <q>problems,</q> <q>vital questions,</q> or at least <q>outlines</q> of
them; new <q>views of the world</q>; new forms of religion and of
Christianity for the <q>modern man</q>; <q>reforms</q> of marriage
and of sexual ethics, and so on. Truth had not been discovered
until the newcomer puts his pen to the paper. Every one
is free to join in. Yea, more, he may not only join in, but
lash those who do not applaud him. According to this notion,
nothing has a right to exist, no <q>sacred prejudice</q> may be
claimed once this self-appointed representative of science takes
the field for <q>research.</q> Behold the Christian truth, it has
stood the test of centuries: but it cannot resist these scientific
freebooters, they rush over it with banners flying.
</p>

<p>
Severe speech would here be in order. A painful spectacle,
these doings of modern thought in the sacred precincts of truth.
<q>Put off the shoes from thy feet; for the place whereon thou
standest is holy ground,</q> we imagine to hear; yet this sanctuary
of truth has been made a profane place of bartering.
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
While still a pagan, but moved by his desire for truth, the
philosopher <hi rend='italic'>Justin</hi> went to the schools of his day to seek the
solution of his doubts and queries. First he turned to a Stoic,
but as he taught nothing of God, <hi rend='italic'>Justin</hi> was unsatisfied. He
next went to a Peripatetic teacher, then to a Pythagorean,
but failed to find what he desired. The Platonist at last gave
him something. Walking alone along the beach, and musing over
<hi rend='italic'>Plato's</hi> principles, he met an old man who referred him to the
truth of Christianity, to the Prophets and the Apostles: <q>They
alone have seen the truth and proclaimed it unto man, they
were afraid of no one, knew no fear; yielded to no opinion;
filled with the Holy Ghost, they spoke only what they saw and
heard. The Scriptures are still extant, and he who takes them
up will find in them a treasure of information about principles
and ultimate things, and all else the philosopher must know,
<pb n='278'/><anchor id='Pg278'/>
if he believes them.</q><note place='foot'>Dial. c. Tryph. 2.</note> And <hi rend='italic'>Justin</hi> found truth and peace, and
bowed to the yoke of the doctrine of Jesus Christ.
</p>

<p>
What a striking contrast between this serious love of truth
in the days of passing heathendom, and the uncontrolled thinking
of so many in our Christian age! To them truth is no
longer a sacred treasure, a yoke to be assumed in reverence;
it has become the plaything of their impressions and inclinations.
Indeed, they consider it a burden to accept the old
Christian truth, with which they meet on all their ways.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='279'/><anchor id='Pg279'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter III. The Bitter Fruit.</head>

<div>
<head>The Vocation of Science.</head>

<p>
Science is, and ever was, an influential factor operating
upon the thought, aims, and actions of man. Hence science
must remain conscious of its vocation. First of all it
is to hold aloft and preserve the <emph>spiritual possessions of
mankind</emph>. True, science must also progress; but progress
means growth, which presupposes the preservation of what has
been received from of old. This applies pre-eminently to the
philosophical-religious patrimony of the past; no error could
be more fatal than to presume that each generation must start
from the beginning, that the foundations, which have safely supported
human life for centuries, must be obsolete because human
nature is suddenly considered changed.
</p>

<p>
What are these foundations? They are the tested religious
and moral convictions of mankind, and, for our nations particularly,
the divine tenets of Christianity, that have been their
highest ideals for centuries, and have produced serenity and a
high standard of morality. If science aims to be the principle of
conservation and not of destruction, it must look upon the safeguarding
of those possessions of the nations as its sacred task.
Indeed, it would perform this task but poorly were it to waste
this patrimony piece by piece, or to shatter it with wicked fist,
instead of respecting and honouring it, or to set fire to the
sanctuary where mankind hitherto has dwelled in peace and
happiness. A science of this kind would not only cease to be a
bulwark for the mental life of mankind, but turn into a positive
danger.
</p>

<p>
In as far as it follows the principles of liberal freedom of
research, present-day science does present this danger. This cannot
<pb n='280'/><anchor id='Pg280'/>
be denied, the facts speak too plainly. By its very nature
it <emph>must</emph> become such danger. For it recognizes no belief,
neither in God nor in the Church; no dogmas, no <q>prejudices,</q>
no traditions, however sacred, are to be respected; it is fundamental
unbelief, the principle of opposition to the Christian
religion. Its autonomous Subject emancipates himself from
the yoke of objective truth which he cannot procreate free out of
himself. It confesses the principle that there are neither truths
nor values that endure; <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>plus ultra!</foreign> always new ideas! <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Quieta
movere</foreign>, hitherto the watchword of unwisdom, is this science's
maxim. And liberal freedom of research is what its nature
compels it to be. Can it do any more than it has done,
to prove itself a principle of mental pauperism? We shall not
demand a list of the things it has thrown aside and shattered.
Let us rather ask, <emph>what it has left whole</emph> of the sacred institutions
of truth, inherited from a Christian past. Alas, it has
cast off and denied everything; it has lost not only the things
a Christian age has treasured, but even those a higher paganism
had revered. Let us examine this sad work of negation and
annihilation. It is a more melancholy spectacle than any war
of extermination that was ever waged against Europe's Christian
civilization by a people bent on trampling down every flower
of Christian culture, and on razing every castle to the ground.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Are We Still Christians?</head>

<p>
This was the question proposed some scores of years ago by
<hi rend='italic'>D. Strauss</hi> to himself, and to those of his mind. With this
question we will begin. To our forefathers, especially of the
German nation, nothing was more sacred than the Christian
religion; no people like the German has absorbed it so fully,
has been so permeated with it. But now, wherever liberal science&mdash;here
especially modern Protestant theology that brings
liberal freedom of research into full application&mdash;wherever it
has made the Christian religion a subject of its study, one treasure
after another has been lost; of the whole of Christendom
nothing remains but an empty name and a formal homage,
reminding of the courtesy paid to deposed rulers.
</p>

<pb n='281'/><anchor id='Pg281'/>

<p>
In the first place, there has been dropped the fundamental thesis
of the <emph>divinity of Christ</emph>, whereupon rests the entire structure
of Christianity. Man's modern emancipation from everything
supernatural has been accomplished also with respect to
the person of Christ: the man Christ is divested of His divinity
and of everything miraculous; His birth by the virgin, His miracles
and prophecies, His resurrection and ascension, once the
subjects of exalting feasts, have fallen a victim to unbelieving
science. It is true, they exert themselves to keep His person
in view, they want the purely human Jesus to hold His old
position of God and man in the believing consciousness, to conceal
the mental pauperization. But this trick is failing more and
more. The Son of God sees Himself gradually placed among the
great men of history; we are becoming accustomed to find in
the <q>Biographies of Celebrated Men,</q> among <q>Religious Educators,</q>
side by side with <hi rend='italic'>Confucius</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Buddha</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Mohammed</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi>, also the name of Jesus.
The lustre of the past belief in His divinity is paling. In the
eyes of unbelieving science He has ceased to be the infallible,
all-surpassing Authority, and the basis of the faith. The teaching
of Jesus has become the subject of an analyzing and eliminating
criticism, and whenever deemed advisable His authority
is simply ignored; He was human, affected by the views and
errors of His age.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Thus they know, as does <hi rend='italic'>H. Gunkel</hi>, that <q>Jesus and the Apostles
evidently have taken those narratives (the miracles of Genesis) to be
reality and not poetry</q>; <q>the men of the New Testament on such questions
take no particular attitude but share the (erroneous) opinions
of their times.</q> They also know <q>that in regard to persons possessed
with demons Jesus shared the erroneous notions of his time</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Braun</hi>),
and <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Delitzsch</hi> informs us that it was <q>particularly a Babylonian
superstition,</q> in consequence of which <q>the belief in demons and devils
assumed such importance in the imagination of Jesus of Nazareth and
of his Galilean disciples.</q> Thus the word is fulfilled literally: <q>He is
a sign which will be contradicted.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
No one knows really <emph>who Jesus was</emph>. His person is the football
of opinions. <q>If any one desiring reliable information, as
to who Jesus Christ was, and what message He brought, should
consult the literature of the day, he would find buzzing round
<pb n='282'/><anchor id='Pg282'/>
him contradictory voices.... Taken all in all, the impression
made by these contradicting opinions is depressing: the confusion
seems past hope,</q> admits Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Also <hi rend='italic'>E. V. Hartmann</hi> remarks: <q>Thus, according to some, Jesus
was a poet, to others a mystic visionary, a third sees in him the militant
hero for freedom and human dignity, to a fourth he was the
organizer of a new Church and of an ecclesiastical system of ethics, to a
fifth the rationalistic reformer ... to the eleventh a naturalistic pantheist
like <hi rend='italic'>Giordano Bruno</hi>, to the twelfth a superman on the order of
<hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi> Zarathustra....</q> A chaos of opinions agreeing only in the
one aim of rejecting His divinity. <hi rend='italic'>A. Schweitzer</hi>, himself a representative
of liberal Protestant research, says, <q>Nothing is more negative
than the result of the research concerning the life of Jesus.</q> And knowing
Jesus's person no longer, they no longer know anything certain
about His teaching, as is clear from the above. According to <hi rend='italic'>I. Wellhausen</hi>,
from the <q>unsufficient fragments at hand we can get but a
scanty conception of the doctrine of Jesus.</q>&mdash;The fathers were rich,
the children have grown poor. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dissipaverunt substantiam suam!</foreign>
</p>

<p>
To many even the <emph>existence of Jesus</emph> has become doubtful; and this
not only to men of an irreligious propaganda, like Prof. <hi rend='italic'>A. Drews</hi>, who,
carried away by the corroding tendency of a radical age, journeyed
from town to town in order to proclaim, in the twentieth century of
Christian reckoning, the scientific discovery of the <q>Myth of Christ</q>;
but even to others the existence of Jesus has become doubtful or at
least valueless. The task now is to do away entirely with the person of
Jesus, and to solve the problem of preserving a Christian faith without
a Christ. In this sense Prof. <hi rend='italic'>M. Rade</hi> writes: <q>Serious and gifted
men having asserted that Jesus never existed (or, what amounts to
the same, that, if He ever lived, nothing is known of Him; hence,
His existence is of no historical importance), we dogmatists almost
have to be grateful to them for having helped us to put a very concrete
question no longer in general terms: how does religious certainty face
historical criticism? but quite specifically: how does religious certainty
(of the Christian) regard the historic-scientific possibility of the
non-existence of the historical Jesus?</q> They frankly assert that they
could entirely forego the person of Christ. Thus Prof. <hi rend='italic'>P. W. Schmiedel</hi>
declares: <q>My innermost religious conviction would not suffer injury
were I to be convinced to-day that Jesus never lived.... I would
know that I could not lose the measure of piety that has become my
property long since, even if I cannot derive it any longer from
Jesus.</q> <q>Neither does my piety require me to see in Jesus an absolutely
perfect type, nor would it disturb me were I to find someone else actually
surpassing Him, which undoubtedly is the case in some respects.</q>
For him to whom Christ is no longer God but a man and capable of
error, His person and existence have necessarily lost their value.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Thus we have arrived at a <emph>Christianity without a Christ</emph>.
As yet the person of the Lord is usually surrounded by a halo:
<pb n='283'/><anchor id='Pg283'/>
it is the after-effect of a faithful past, the last rays of a setting
sun. That this last glimmer, too, will pale and give way to
darkness is but a question of time, when with more honesty expression
will be given to the conclusion necessarily arrived at.
If Christ is not what He claimed to be, God and Messiah, then
the belief in His being the Son of God and the Messiah, in
His right to abrogate the religion of the Old Testament and
to found a new religion, commanding its acceptance under
penalty of damnation&mdash;all this can be nothing but the result
of religious fanaticism and mental derangement. And science
is, in all seriousness, preparing to turn into this direction.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is true, many are hesitating to draw these fearful conclusions
and to utter them; arriving at this point, they cautiously stop: so
<hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>. <q>How Jesus could arrive at the consciousness of His unique
relation to God as His Son, how He became conscious of His power as
well as of the obligation and task involved in this power, that is His
secret, and no psychology will ever disclose it.... Here, all research
must halt.</q> It is the silence of embarrassment, but equally of unscientific
method. Having arrived at untenable conclusions, when
question upon question is impetuously suggested, they stop suddenly
and have nothing to say but a vague word about inscrutableness.
</p>

<p>
But there are those who actually speak the word so horrible to a
Christian heart: Jesus was demented, a subject for pathology. <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>
indicated this cautiously: <q>One who expects to return after his death
in a manner in which no human being had ever returned, he is to us
... not exactly a lunatic, but a great visionary.</q> Others speak
more plainly. <hi rend='italic'>Holtzmann's</hi> answer to the question: Was Jesus an
Ecstatic, is an emphatic: <q>Yes, He was.</q> <hi rend='italic'>De Loosten</hi> considers him
insane. <hi rend='italic'>E. Rasmussen</hi> thinks Him an epileptic, but grants to physicians
the right to reckon him among paranoiacs or lunatics. To <hi rend='italic'>A. Jülicher</hi>
Jesus is a visionary, <q>a mystic, not satisfied to dream of his ideals,
but who lived with them, worked with them, even saw them tangibly
before his eyes, deceiving himself and others.</q> Thus the supernatural
has become madness; Jesus Christ, for whose divinity the martyrs
went to their death, wears now, before the forum of a false science,
Herod's cloak of foolishness.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With the fall of this fundamental dogma there must necessarily
fall all other specific truths of Christianity, and they
have fallen. The Holy Writ, once the work of the Holy Ghost,
has now become a book like the Indian Vedda, to some perhaps
even more unreliable; original sin, Redemption and grace, the
Sacrifice of the Mass and the Sacraments, have been dropped or
<pb n='284'/><anchor id='Pg284'/>
changed into symbols, of which every one may think what he
pleases. They have tried to make Christianity <q>acceptable to
our times,</q> to <q>bring it nearer to the modern idea.</q> There is
really nothing left to offend modern man, nothing that could
get in conflict with any idea. The essence of Christianity is
depreciated and emptied until it has become only a vague
sentiment, without thought; a few names, without ideas.
<q>Christianity as a Gospel,</q> so teaches <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>, <q>has but one
aim: to find the living God, that every individual may find
Him as his God, gaining strength and joy and peace. How it
attains this aim through the centuries, whether with the Coefficient
of the Jewish or the Greek, of flight from the world or
of civilization, of Gnosticism or Agnosticism&mdash;this all is of
secondary consideration.</q> Of secondary consideration it is, then,
whether one is convinced of the existence of God or whether
he doubts with the agnostics, whether he believes in a personal
God or not. To-day even the pantheist who does not acknowledge
a Creator of Heaven and Earth may be a Christian; and so
can he who no longer believes in personal immortality and in
a hereafter; for, we are informed, <q>this religion is above the
contrasts of here and the beyond, of life and death, of Reason
and Ecstatics, of Judaism and Hellenism</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>). Thus
there is no thought which could not be made to agree with this
despoiled Christianity. For, we are told further, <q>much less
does the Gospel presuppose, or is joined to, a fixed theory of
nature&mdash;not even in a negative sense could this be asserted</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>). Materialism and Spiritualism, Theism and Pantheism,
Belief or Negation of Creation, everything will harmonize
with a Christianity thus degraded to a thing without
character or principle.<note place='foot'><q>But for the retention of names and terms <hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi> leaves nothing
of the specific nature of Christianity,</q> admits the Protestant Professor
of Theology, <hi rend='italic'>W. Walther</hi>, in his book, <q>Harnack's Wesen des Christentums</q>
(1901).</note>
</p>

<p>
All that is left is a word of love, of a kind Father, of filiation
to God, and union with God: words robbed of their true meaning;
a shell without a kernel, ruins with the name <q>Christianity</q>
still inscribed thereon, telling of a house that once
<pb n='285'/><anchor id='Pg285'/>
stood here, wherein the fathers dwelt, but long since vacated
by their children. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dissipaverunt substantiam suam!</foreign>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As to God and divine filiation, everybody is welcome to his own
interpretation. He may form with <hi rend='italic'>O. Pfleiderer</hi> the <q>Neoprotestantism</q>
which, <q>after breaking with all ecclesiastical dogmas, recalled to
mind the truths of the Christian religion, hidden beneath the surface
of these dogmas, in order to realize, more purely and more perfectly
than ever before, the truth of God's incarnation in the new forms of
autonomous thought and of the moral life of human society.</q> Christianity
and God&mdash;the symbols of autonomous man! Or he may
follow <hi rend='italic'>Bousset</hi>, to whom nature is God, and in this way combines harmoniously
Christianity and Atheism. <q>This is the forceful evolution
of Christian religion,</q> says he, <q>the notion of redemption, the Dogma
of the divinity of Christ, the trinity, the idea of satisfaction and sacrifice,
miracles, the old conception of revelation&mdash;all these we see carried
off by this wave of progress.</q> <q>What is left? Timid people may
think: a wreck. But to our pleasant surprise we found stated at many
points in our inquiry: what is left is the simple Gospel of Jesus.</q> And
what does this simplified Gospel contain? <q>Of course we cannot simply
accept in full the Gospel of Jesus.... There is the internal and the
external. The external and non-essential includes the judgment of the
world, angels, miracles, inspiration, and other things.</q> All this may be
disregarded. <q>But even the essentials, the internal of the Gospel cannot
be simply subscribed to. They must be interpreted.</q> What, then,
is this essential, this internal of the Gospel, and what is its interpretation?
<q>The belief of the Gospel in the personal heavenly Father;
to this we hold fast with all our strength. But we carry this belief
in God into our modern thought.</q> And what becomes then of <q>God</q>?
<q>To us, God is no longer the kind Father above the starry skies. God
is the Infinite, Omnipotent, who is active in the immense universe, in
infiniteness of time and space, in infinitely small and in infinitely large
things. He is the God whose garb is the iron law of nature which hides
Him from the human eye by a compact, impenetrable veil.</q> We see
the belief of the Gospel has dwindled down to atheistic Monism.
</p>

<p>
As early as 1874 <hi rend='italic'>Ed. von Hartmann</hi>, in his book <q>Die Selbstzersetzung
des Christentums,</q> came to the conclusion that <q>liberal Protestantism
has in no sense the right to claim a place within Christendom.</q> In a
later book his keen examination demonstrates how the speculation of
liberal Protestantism has changed the Christian religion step by step
into pantheism: <q>Not a single point in the doctrine of the Church is
spared by this upheaval of principle, every dogma is formally turned into
its very opposite, in order to make its religious idea conform to the
tenet of divine immanence.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is called the development of Christianity. It is this <q>religious
progress,</q> the same <q>free Christianity,</q> that they are now
trying to promote by international congresses. The invitation to the
<q>World's Congress for free Christianity and religious progress</q> at
Berlin, in 1910, was signed by more than 130 German professors, including
<pb n='286'/><anchor id='Pg286'/>
47 theologians. We have here the development of the dying
into the lifeless corpse, the progress of the strong castle into a
dilapidated ruin, the advance of the rich man to beggary.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We began our inquiry with the question proposed some years
ago by <hi rend='italic'>D. Strauss</hi> to his brethren-in-spirit: Are we still
Christians? We may now quote the answer, which he gives at
the conclusion of his own investigation: <q>Now, I think, we
are through. And the result? the reply to my question?&mdash;must
I state it explicitly? Very well; my conviction is, that if we
do not want to make excuses, if we do not want to shift and
shuffle and quibble, if yes is to be yes, and no to remain no,
in short, if we desire to speak like honest, sincere men, we
must confess: we are no longer Christians.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is the bitter fruit of autonomous freedom of thinking,
which, declining any guidance by faith, recognizes no other
judge of truth than individual reason, with all the license and
the hidden inclinations that rule it. Protestantism has adopted
this freedom of research as its principle; in consistently
applying it, Protestantism has completely denatured the Christian
religion. If anything can prove irrefutably the monstrosity
and cultural incapacity of modern freedom of research,
it is the fate of Protestantism. Any one capable of seriously
judging serious things must realize here how pernicious this
freedom is for the human mind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Reduced to Beggary.</head>

<p>
But the loss is even greater. The better class of paganism
still clung to the general notion of an existing personal God,
of a future life, of a reward after death; it was convinced of
the existence of an immortal soul and a future reward, of the
necessity of religion, of immutable standards for morals and
thought. Has liberal science at least been able to preserve this
essential property of a higher paganism? Alas, no! It has
lost nearly everything.
</p>

<p>
No longer has it a personal God. While belief in God may
still survive in the hearts of many representatives of this
science, it has vanished from science itself. It begs to be
<pb n='287'/><anchor id='Pg287'/>
excused from accepting any solution of questions, if God is
a factor in the solution. The opinion prevails that <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> has
forever shattered all rational demonstrations of the existence of
God. Yet <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> permits this existence as a <q>postulate,</q> which,
according to <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>, <q>may be regarded as the attic room,
where God who has been retired from His office may be decently
sheltered and employed.</q> But now He has been given notice
to quit even this refuge. There must be nothing left of Him
but His venerable name, which is appropriated by the new apostasy
in the guise of pantheism or a masked materialism.
Monism is the joint name for it: this is the modern <q>belief
in God.</q> In days gone by it was frankly called <q>atheism.</q>
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This disappearance of the old belief in God is noted with satisfaction
by modern science: <q>It is true,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, <q>the belief in gods ...
is dying out, and will never be resurrected. Nor is there an essential
difference whether many or only one of these beings are assumed. A
monotheism which looks upon God as an individual being and lets him
occasionally interfere in the world as in something separate from and
foreign to him, such a monotheism is essentially not different from
polytheism. If one should insist on such conception of theism, then, of
course, it will be difficult to contradict those who maintain that science
must lead to atheism.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Therefore God, as a personal being, is dead, and will never
come to life again. While there is an enormous exaggeration in
these words, they nevertheless glaringly characterize the ideas
of the science of which <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> is the mouthpiece. It does not
want directly to give up the name of God; it serves as a mask to
conceal the uncanny features of pantheism and materialism.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The universe,</q> we hear often and in many variations, <q>is the expression
of a uniform, original principle, which may be termed God,
Nature, primitive force, or anything else, and which appears to man
in manifold forms of energy, like matter, light, warmth, electricity,
chemical energy, or psychical process.... These fundamental ideas of
monism are by no means <q>atheistic.</q> Many monists in spite of assertions
to the contrary believe in a supreme divine principle, which penetrates
the whole world, living and operating in everything. Of course,
if God is taken to mean a being who exists outside of the world ...
then it is true we are atheists</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Plate</hi>). We have already seen that
one can even be a Protestant theologian and yet be satisfied with a
<q>God</q> of this description.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
In the place of God has stepped <emph>man</emph>, with his advanced civilization,
radiant in the divine aureole of the absolute as its
<pb n='288'/><anchor id='Pg288'/>
highest incarnation. But what has liberal research done even to
him? According to the Christian idea, man bears the stamp of
God on his forehead: <q>after My image I have created thee</q>;
in his breast he carries a spiritual soul, endowed with freedom
and immortality&mdash;<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>gloria et honore coronasti eum</foreign>. Liberal
science pretends to uplift and exalt man; but in reality it
strips him of his adornments, one after the other. He is no
longer a creature of God because this would contradict science.
His birthplace and the home of his childhood are no longer in
Paradise, but in the jungles of Africa, among the animals,
whose descendent man is now said to be. Liberal science, almost
without exception, denies the freedom of will which raises man
high above the beast, and as a rule it calls such freedom an
<q>illusion</q>: of a substantial soul, of immortality, of an ultimate
possession of God after death, it frequently, if not always,
knows nothing.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Let us take up a handbook of modern <hi rend='italic'>Psychology</hi> of this kind,
Wundt's, for instance. We see at a glance that it is a very learned
work. The thirty lectures inform us in minute investigations of the
various methods and resources of psychological research. The reader
has reached the twentieth lecture, and he asks, how about the soul?
The title of the book states that the chapters would treat of the human
soul, but so far not a word has been said about it. But there are ten
lectures more; he continues to turn over the leaves of the book. He
finds beautiful things said about expression and emotions, about instincts
in animal and man, about spontaneous actions and other
things. At last, the third before the last page of the book, there arises
the question, what about the soul, and what does the reader learn?
<q>Our soul is nothing else, but the sum total of our perception, our
feeling and our will.</q> The conviction he held hitherto, that he possessed
a substantial, immortal soul, which remains through changing conceptions
and sentiments, he sees rejected as <q>fiction.</q> The reader learns
that, though he may still use the term <q>soul,</q> he has no real soul,
much less a spiritual soul, least of all an immortal soul. In its stead
he is treated to some learned statements about muscular sensations and
such things, by way of compensation. <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>, too, speaks of the <q>illusions,
based upon the old theories about the soul,</q> and he rejects the
dualistic psychology which <q>mistook an abstract thought, the soul, for
a real being, for an immaterial substance</q>; and which defended this
notion <q>with worthless reasons.</q>
</p>

<p>
It is manifest that, together with the substantial soul, immortality
is also disposed of. True, here too the word is cautiously retained;
but by immortality is now understood perpetuation in the human
race, in the ideas of posterity, in <q>objective spirit,</q> in the <q>imperishable
<pb n='289'/><anchor id='Pg289'/>
value of ethical possessions,</q> for which the individual has laboured.
Some fine words are said about it, as roses are used to cover a grave.
Yet, it is only the immortality of the barrel of Regulus, or the Gordian
knot in history, the immortality of which the printers' press may partake
in the effect of the books it prints. To quote <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi> again: <q>The
fact of the objective spirit, together with the organic connection of
the generations to one another, form the scientific reality of what
appears in popular, mythological tenets of faith as the idea of personal
immortality ... and which has been defended by the dualistic
psychology with worthless, invalid arguments.</q> The refutation of these
arguments does not bother him. <q>A refutation of these scholastic
arguments is as little needed as a refutation of the belief in the
miracles and demons of former centuries is needed by a man standing
on the ground of modern natural science.</q> This reminds one of
<hi rend='italic'>Haeckel's</hi> method. The latter nevertheless found it worth while in his
<q>Weltraetsel</q> to dispose in thirteen lines of six such arguments, and
then to assure the reader that <q>All these and similar arguments have
fallen to the ground.</q> That the matter in question is an idea that has
been the foundation of Christian civilization and ethics for thousands of
years, that has led millions to holiness; an idea, indeed, that has
been the common property of all nations at all times&mdash;this seems to
count for very little.
</p>

<p>
This technique of a superficial speculation, which, devoid of piety,
casts everything overboard, finds no trouble in disposing of the entire
<emph>spiritual world</emph>. <q>No one is capable,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi> again, <q>of imagining
a purely spiritual reality.</q> This is disposed of. <q>Since the war
between the Aristotle-scholastic and the mechanical method has been
waged, spiritual powers have never played any other part in the
explanation of the world than that of an unknown quantity in
equations of a higher degree, which, unsolvable by methods hitherto
prevalent, are only awaiting the superior master and a new technique
(<hi rend='italic'>sic</hi>) in order to disappear</q> (p. 77 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
With the denial of a personal God and of the immortality of
the soul, true <emph>religion</emph> is abandoned. Of course, there is much
said and written about religion in our days: the scientific literature
about it has grown to tremendous proportions&mdash;to say
nothing of newspapers, novels, and plays. One might welcome
this as a proof that this world will never entirely satisfy the
human heart. But it is also a sign that religion is no longer a
secure possession, but has become a problem&mdash;that it has been
lost. Even on the part of free-thought it is not denied that <q>only
unhappy times will permit the existence of religious problems;
and that this problem is the utterance of mental discord.</q> Yet
they do not want to forego religion entirely, for they feel that
irreligion is tantamount to degeneration. But what has become
<pb n='290'/><anchor id='Pg290'/>
of religion? It has been degraded to a vague sentiment and
longing, without religious truths and duties, a plaything for
pastime.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For <hi rend='italic'>Schleiermacher</hi> religion is a feeling of simple dependence,
though no one knows upon whom he is dependent: according to <hi rend='italic'>Wundt</hi>
religion consists in <q>man serving infinite purposes, together with
his finite purposes, the ultimate fulfilment whereof remains hidden
to his eye,</q> which probably means something, but I do not know
what. <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> calls his materialism the religion of the true, good,
and beautiful; <hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi> even thinks, <q>As the realm of science is the real,
and the realm of art the possible, so the realm of religion is the impossible.</q>
Religion having been degraded to such a level, it is no
longer astonishing that religion is attributed even to animals, and
in the words of <hi rend='italic'>E. von Hartmann</hi>, <q>we cannot help attributing a
religious character, as far as the animal is concerned, to the relation
between the intelligent domestic animals and their masters.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What, finally, has become of the old standard of <emph>morals</emph>?
A modern philosopher may answer the question.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Fouillée</hi> writes: <q>In our day, far more so than thirty years ago,
morality itself, its reality, its necessity and usefulness, is in the
balance.... I have read with much concern how my contemporaries
are at fundamental variance in this respect, and how they contradict
one another. I have tried to form an opinion of all these different
opinions. Shall I say it? I have found in the province of morals a
confusion of ideas and sentiments to an extent that it seemed impossible
to me to illustrate thoroughly what might be termed contemporaneous
sophistry</q> (Le Moralisme de Kant, etc.).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Where is left now to liberal science a single remnant of those
great truths on which mankind has hitherto lived, and which it
needs for existence? There was a God&mdash;but He is gone. There
was a life to come, and a supernatural world; they are lost.
Man had a soul, endowed with freedom, spirituality, and immortality;
he has it no longer. He had fixed principles of
reasoning and laws of morals; they are gone. He possessed
Christ, full of grace and truth, he possessed redemption and a
Church; everything is lost. Burnt to the ground is the homestead.
In the blank voids, that cheerful casements were, sits
despair; man stands at the grave of all that fortune gave!
</p>

<p>
The names alone have survived; now and then they speak
<pb n='291'/><anchor id='Pg291'/>
of God and religion, of Christianity and faith, immortality and
freedom; but the words are false, pretending a possession that is
lost long since. They are patches from a grand dress, once
worn by our ancestors; ruins of the ancestral house that the
children have lost. They are still cherished as the memories of
better times. People thus acknowledge the irreparable forfeiture
which those names denote, without realizing how they pronounce
their own condemnation by having destroyed these possessions.<note place='foot'><hi rend='italic'>Uhlich</hi>, founder of a community of free-thinkers, who died in 1873,
thus describes his evolution from rationalism to atheism: <q>At the
beginning I could say: We hold fast to Jesus, to Him who stood
too high to be called a mere man. Ten years later I could say: God,
virtue, immortality&mdash;these three are the eternal foundation of religion.
And after ten more years I could issue a declaration wherein God was
mentioned no more.</q> Similar progress in spiritual disintegration has
been shown by Liberalism in recent years: first it partially abandoned
Christian dogma, without however quite breaking loose from it; in the
eighteenth century rationalistic enlightenment tore loose from all
revelation, adhering only to natural religion: to-day even this is lost.</note>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Dissipaverunt substantiam suam.</foreign>
</p>

<p>
The son came to his father. In his heedless anxiety for
freedom he would leave the father's house, to get away from
restraining discipline and dependence. <q>Father, give me the
portion of the goods that falleth to me.</q> And he departed into
a far country. Soon he had spent all and had nothing to appease
his hunger.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Despairing of Truth.</head>

<p>
These, then, are the achievements liberal research can boast
of in the fields of philosophy and religion: Negations and again
negations; temples and altars it has destroyed, sacred images
it has broken, pillars it has knocked down. Free from Christianity,
free from God, free from the life to come and the supernatural,
free from authority and faith&mdash;it is rich in freedom
and negation. But what does it offer in place of all the things
it has destroyed? What spiritual goods does it show to the
expectant eyes of its confiding followers? The most hopeless
things imaginable, namely, despair of all higher truth, mental
confusion, and decay. One other brief glance at the consequences
<pb n='292'/><anchor id='Pg292'/>
and we shall be competent to judge of the fitness of
liberal freedom of thought for the civilization of mankind.
</p>

<p>
As far as it is inspired by philosophy, modern science confesses
the principle: <q>No objective truth can be positively
known, at least not in metaphysics</q>; restless doubt is the lot
of the searching intellect. We have amplified this elsewhere in
these pages. This result of the modern doctrine of cognition
is not infrequently boasted of. It was good enough, say they,
for the ancients to live in the silly belief of possessing eternal
truth; they were simple and unsuspecting; we know there is
in store for man only doubt and everlasting struggle for truth.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>We confess that we do not know whether there are for mankind
as a whole, and for the individual, tasks and goals that extend beyond
this earthly existence</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>). <q>There is no scientific philosophy of
generally recognized standard, but only in the form of various experiments
for the purpose of defining and expressing the harmony and the
idea of the active principle; consequently there cannot be a final philosophy,
it must be ready at all times to revise any point that previously
seemed to have been established</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>). <q>Only to dogmatism,</q>
says another, <q>are the various theories of the world contradictory; to
science they are hypotheses of equal value, which, as they are all limited,
may exist side by side, the theistic as well as the atheistic, the dualistic,
the monistic, and whatever their names may be. Man, who conceives
these hypotheses, is master over them all and makes use of them, here of
one, there of another, according to the kind of the problem he is occupied
with at the time. Thus, he is independent of any view of the world</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>L. von Sybel</hi>). Again we are told: <q>There has been formulated a free
variety of metaphysical systems, none of them demonstrable.... Is it
our task, perhaps, to select the true one? This would be an odd superstition;
this metaphysical anarchy is teaching, as obviously as possible,
the relativity of all metaphysical systems</q> (<hi rend='italic'>W. Dilthey</hi>). Therefore,
nothing but impressions and opinions, and not the truth; indeed, for
the cognition of transcendental, metaphysical truths, they often have
only words of disdain.
</p>

<p>
<q>The fact should be emphasized,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>G. Spicker</hi>, <q>that philosophy
really is devoid of any higher ideal; that, through its doubt of the
objective cognizability of things above us, outside and inside of us, it has
fallen prey to scepticism, even if philosophers do not admit it and try
to evade the issue with the phrase <q>theory of cognition.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
A science cannot sink to a lower level than by the admission
that it has nothing to offer and nothing to accomplish.
It is tantamount to bankruptcy. This science undertakes to
nourish the human mind, but offers stones instead of bread; it
<pb n='293'/><anchor id='Pg293'/>
wants to uplift and to instruct, and confesses that it has nothing
to tell. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Amphora coepit institui, currente rota urceus exit.</foreign>
In the beginning a proud consciousness and the promise to be
everything to mankind; at the end mental pauperism and
scepticism, a caricature of science.
</p>

<p>
This, then, is the terminal at which the free-thought of
subjectivism has arrived: the loss of truth, without which man's
mind wanders restlessly and without a goal. That is the penalty
for gambling boldly with human perception, the retribution for
rebelling against the rights of truth and for the vainglorious
arrogance of the intellect, which would draw only from its own
cisterns the water of life, while alone those lying deep in the
Divine may offer him the eternal fountains of objective truth.
Scepticism is gnawing at the mental life of the world. A scepticism
cloaked with the names of criticism and research, and of
positivism and empiric knowledge, but which, nevertheless, remains
what it is, an ominous demon, liberated from the grave
into which has been lowered the Christian spiritual life, the
spirit of darkness now pervading the world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>In All Directions of the Compass.</head>

<p>
They have lost their way, puzzled by mazes and perplexed
with error they are in hopeless confusion; a correlative of
individualistic thinking. If the absolute subject and his experiences
of life are the self-appointed court of last resort, the
result must be anarchy and not accord. This is manifest;
moreover, it is frankly admitted by the spokesmen of freethought.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This anarchy is described in vivid words by Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, recently
the indefatigable champion of freest thought: <q>We no longer have a
Protestant philosophy, in the sense of a standard system. <hi rend='italic'>Hegel's</hi>
philosophy was the last to occupy such a position. Anarchy rules ever
since. The attempted rally around the name of <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi> failed to put
an end to the prevalent anarchy, or to the division into small fractions
and individualisms. Then there is the mental neurasthenia of our
times, the absolute lack of ideas, especially noticeable among so-called
educated people.... Billboard art has found a counterpart in billboard-philosophy.
Here, there, and everywhere we meet the cry: here
<pb n='294'/><anchor id='Pg294'/>
is the saviour, the secret ruler, the magic doctor, who cures all ills
of our diseased age.... After a while, the mob has again dispersed
and the thing is forgotten</q> (<q>Philosophia Militans</q>).
</p>

<p>
<q>There is no uniform philosophic theory of the world, such as we,
at least to a certain extent, used to have,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> elsewhere,
<q>the latest ideas are diverging in all directions of the compass.</q>
When one buildeth up, and another pulleth down, what profit have
they but the labour? (Ecclus. xxxiv. 28). <q>We have no metaphysics
nowadays,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>R. Eucken</hi> in the same strain, <q>and there are not a
few who are proud of it. They only would have the right to be so
if our philosophy were in excellent shape, if, even without metaphysics,
firm convictions ruled our life and actions, if great aims held us together
and lifted us above the smallness of the merely human. The
fact is an unlimited discordance, a pitiful insecurity in all matters of
principle, a defencelessness against the petty human, and soullessness
accompanied by superabounding exterior manifestation of life.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
This is the status of modern philosophy and also of liberal,
Protestant, theology. Of views of the world, of notions and
forms of Christianity, of ideas, essays and contributions to them,
there is choice in abundance. Here, materialistic Monism is
proclaimed, warranted to solve all riddles. There, spiritualistic
Pantheism is retailed in endless varieties. Yonder, Agnosticism
is strutting: no longer philosophy, but facts and reality, is its
slogan. Then comes the long procession of ethical views of
life: <q>Contemplations of life; theories of human existence
surround us and court us in plenty; the coincidence of ample
historical learning with active reflection induces manifold combinations,
and makes it easy for the individual to draw pictures
of this kind according to circumstance and mood; and so we see
individual philosophies whirling about promiscuously, winning
and losing the favour of the day, and shifting and transmuting
themselves in kaleidoscopic change</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Eucken</hi>). <hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi>, although
he lectured with great assurance on his own system,
lamented: <q>Every philosophy comes forth with the pretension
to refute not only the preceding philosophy, but to remedy its
defects, to have at last found the right thing.</q> But past experience
shows, that to this philosophy, too, the passage from Holy
Writ is applicable: <q>Behold, the feet that will carry thee away
are already at the threshold.</q> Indeed, often it has come to pass
that these philosophers themselves bury their ideas, preparatory
to entering another camp. Consider the changes that men like
<pb n='295'/><anchor id='Pg295'/>
<hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fichte</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Schelling</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>, have essayed in the
short course of a few decades, and we are justified in assuming
that they would again have changed their last ideas had death
not interfered.
</p>

<p>
Now and then such confusion of opinions is considered an
advantage, the advantage of fertility. To be sure, it is fertility,&mdash;the
fertility of fruitless attempts, of errors, and of fancies,
the fertility of disorder and chaos. If this fertility be a cause
of pride for science, then mathematics, physics, astronomy, and
other exact sciences, are indeed to be pitied for having to forego
this fertility of philosophy, and the privilege of being an arena
for contradictory views.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Without Peace and without Joy.</head>

<p>
After the hopeless shipwreck of the modern, godless thought,
can we wonder at meeting frequently the despondency of <emph>pessimism</emph>?
Is not pessimism the first born of scepticism? At
the close of the nineteenth century we read, again and again,
in reviews of the past and forecasts of the future, how the
modern world stands perplexed before the riddles of life, confessing
in pessimistic mood that it is dissatisfied and unhappy
to the depth of its soul. With proud self-consciousness, boasting
of knowledge and power of intellect, they had entered the
nineteenth century, praising themselves in the words: How
great, O man, thou standest at the century's close, with palm of
victory in thy hand, the fittest son of time! With heads bowed
in shame these same representatives of modern thought make
their exit from the same century.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Of the number that voiced this sentiment we quote but one, Prof.
<hi rend='italic'>R. Eucken</hi>, who wrote: <q>The greatness of the work is beyond doubt.
This work more and more opens up and conquers the world, unfolds our
powers, enriches our life, it leads us in quick victorious marches from
triumph to triumph.... Thus, it is true, our desired objects have been
attained, but they disclosed other things than we expected: the more
our powers and ideas are attracted by the work, the more we must realize
the neglect of the inner man and of his unappeased, ardent longing
for happiness. Doubts spring up concerning the entire work; we
<pb n='296'/><anchor id='Pg296'/>
must ask whether the new civilization be not too much a development
of bare force, and too little a cultivation of the being, whether because
of our strenuous attention to surroundings, the problems of innermost
man are not neglected. There is also noticeable a sad lack in
moral power: we feel powerless against selfish interests and overwhelming
passions: mankind is more and more dividing itself into hostile
sects and parties. And such doubts arouse to renewed vigour the old,
eternal problems, which faithfully accompany our evolution through
all its stages. Former times did not finally solve them, (?) but they
were, at least to a degree, mollified and quieted. But now they are
here again unmitigated and unobscured. The enigmatical of human
existence is impressed upon us with unchecked strength, the darkness
concerning the Whence and Whither, the dismal power of blind necessity,
accident and sorrow in our fate, the low and vulgar in the
human soul, the difficult complications of the social body: all unite
in the question: Has our existence any real sense or value? Is
it not torn asunder to an extent that we shall be denied truth and
peace for ever?... Hence it is readily understood why a gloomy
pessimism is spreading more and more, why the depressed feeling of
littleness and weakness is pervading mankind in the midst of its
triumphs.</q>
</p>

<p>
Similar, and profoundly true, are the words spoken some years ago by
a noted critic in the <q>Literarische Zentralblatt</q> (1900): <q>A painful
lament and longing pervades our restless and peaceless time. The
bulk of our knowledge is daily increasing, our technical ability hardly
knows of difficulties it could not overcome ... and yet we are not
satisfied. More and more frequently we meet with the tired, disheartened
question: What's the use? We lack the one thing which would
give support and impetus to our existence, a firm and assured view of
the world. Or, to be more exact, we have found that we cannot live with
the view of the world which in this century of enlightenment has
stamped its imprint more and more upon our entire mental life. Materialism,
in coarser or finer form, has penetrated deeply our habits of
thought, even in those who would indignantly protest against being
called materialists; the name seemed to imply scientific earnestness and
liberal views. However, there was still left a considerable fund of old,
idealistic values, and as long as we could draw upon them we saw in
materialism only the power to clear up rooted prejudices, and to open
the road for progress in every field. To the newer generation, however,
little or nothing is left of this old fund, hence, having nothing
else but materialism to depend upon, they are confronted by an appalling
dreariness and emptiness of existence. And ever since the man on the
street has absorbed the easy materialistic principles, and looks down
from the height of his <q>scientific</q> view of life contemptuously upon all
reactionaries, we have become aware of the danger that imperils everything
implied by the collective word <q>humanism.</q> This explains the
plethora of literature which in these days deals with the questions of
a world philosophy.</q> Who is not reminded after reading this mournful
confession of the words of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>: <q>Restless is our heart,
till it finds rest in Thee</q>?
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='297'/><anchor id='Pg297'/>

<p>
If it be true, then, that philosophical thought stands in
closest connection with civilization, determining the latter in
its loftier aspects, then the freedom of thought of modern subjectivism
has proved its incompetence as a power for civilization;
it can produce only a sham-civilization, it can incite the minds
and keep them in nervous tension, until, tired of fruitless endeavour,
they yield to pessimism. However painful it may be
to admit it, this freedom of thought is and remains the principle
of natural decadence of all the higher elements of a
culture that is not determined by the number of guns, by
steam-engines, and high-schools for girls, but which consists,
chiefly, in a steadfast, ideal condition of reason and will, from
which all else obtains significance and value. What further
proof of intellectual and cultural incompetence can be demanded
which this principle has not furnished already?
</p>

<p>
If this be the fact, then it follows in turn that in the life
of higher culture, where the health of the soul and the marrow of
mental life is at stake, there can rule but a single principle, the
<emph>objectivism of Christian thought</emph>, the principle of absolute
submission, without variance and change, to a truth against
which man has no rights. The submission of Christian thought
to a religious, teaching authority, recognized as infallible in all
matters pertaining to its domain, while not an exhaustive presentment
of this principle, is its perceptive and concrete effect.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>A Rock in the Waters.</head>

<p>
The history of human thought of all ages, but especially of the
last centuries, proves how necessary a divine revelation is to
man; viz., the clear exposition of the highest truths in the
view of world and of life, emphasized by a divine authority,
which links the human mind to the one immutable truth; not
only in ignorant nations, not only in the man of the common
people, but also, and more especially, in the educated man and
in the scientist, he, namely, who, through the moderate studies
of a small intellect, has collected a little sum of knowledge
that is apt to confuse his limited understanding and to rob him
<pb n='298'/><anchor id='Pg298'/>
of modesty. It is just as manifest that revelation alone does not
suffice, that there is needed also the enduring forum of a teaching
Church, which in the course of centuries gives expression to
truth with infallible, binding authority.
</p>

<p>
The full truth of this is felt even by those unfavourably disposed
toward this authority. A recent champion of autonomous
freedom of thought, the Protestant theologian, <hi rend='italic'>F. Troeltsch</hi>,
makes this concession in the words: <q>The immediate consequence
of such autonomy is necessarily a steadily more intensified
individualism of convictions, opinions, theories, and practical
ends and aims. An absolute supra-individual union is effected
only by an enormous power such as the belief in an immediate,
supernatural, divine, revelation, as possessed by Catholicism,
and organized in the Church as the extended and continued
incarnation of God. This tie gone, the necessary sequel will
be a splitting up in all sorts of human opinions.</q><note place='foot'>Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Spencer Jones</hi>, an Episcopal clergyman, says in his book, <q>England
and the Holy See</q>: <q>For the Episcopal Church the junction with
Rome, with its sharply defined dogmas, its supreme ministry, and its
firm leadership, is a question of life. More and more the supernatural
belief is replaced by individual opinions, a condition which in itself
causes faith to disappear. A condition like the present, making it
possible that in one and the same congregation the most pronounced
contrariety of opinions in respect to most essential tenets, as well
as a general confusion of minds, is not only tolerated, but directly
welcomed, such a condition cannot endure in the long run.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
This is to the Catholic a caution to appreciate the ministry
of his Church ever more highly, and to cleave to it still closer.
He will not agree with those who think that in our time the
principle of Authority must retire. The more his eyes are
opened by the present situation, the more clearly he realizes
where thought emancipated from faith and authority has
led, the more he will affirm his conscious belief in authority.
His foothold upon the rock of the Church will be the firmer
the more restless the billows of unsafe opinions rise and roll
about him. The Catholic of mature, Catholic, conviction would
consider it folly to abandon the rock for the restless and turbulent
play of the waves. Many, indeed, who are looking for a
safe place of truth, we see for this reason taking refuge in a
<pb n='299'/><anchor id='Pg299'/>
strong Church; many are impressed by the stability of Catholic
authority.<note place='foot'>A French author, <hi rend='italic'>G. Goyau</hi>, states with truth: <q>What makes the
(Catholic) Church lovable in the eyes of thinking minds outside of
the Church, is just her uncompromising attitude. They see a Church
steadfast, permanent, imperturbable. The stumbling block of yore has
become for them an isle of safety. They are thankful to Rome for
holding before their eyes <emph>the</emph> Christianity, instead of giving them the
choice of several kinds of Christianity, including kinds still unknown,
which they undoubtedly themselves may discover, if so inclined. They
welcome the Roman Church as the <q>Teacher of Faith</q> and <q>Conqueror
of Errors,</q> and, to quote more of the forcible language of the Protestant
<hi rend='italic'>de Pressensé</hi>: <q>they are disgusted with a Christianity for the lowest
bidder, but are impressed by the rigid inflexibility of Catholicism....</q></q>
(Autour du Catholicisme social. I. 1896).</note>
</p>

<p>
The present situation is similar socially to that of the ancient
world at its close, and also in regard to the spiritual life.
Then, as now, there was learning without idealism, corroded
by scepticism, without harmony and cheer. Then, as now,
there was but one power to offer rescue. Faith and Church.
A longing for help is now also prevailing in the world. It
feels its helplessness. If they only had the conviction of a
<hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi>, who prayed for deliverance from his errors:
<q>When I often and forcefully realized the agility, sagacity, and
acumen of the human mind, I could not believe that truth was
hidden completely from us&mdash;rather only the way and manner
how to discover it, and that we must accept these from a
divine authority</q> (<hi rend='italic'>De utilit. credendi</hi>, 8).
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
It was a solemn hour, pregnant with profound significance,
when at midnight at the beginning of this century all the
churchbells of the Catholic globe were ringing, and, while everything
around was silent, their blessed sound was resounding
alone over the earth, over villages and cities, over countries
and nations. Grandly there resounded into the whole world,
over the heads of the children of men about to enter upon a
new century of their history, that the Catholic Church is the
Queen in the realm of mind, that she alone preserves infallibly
the truths and ideals of which mankind is in quest, by which
they are raised above earthly turmoil&mdash;those truths and
<pb n='300'/><anchor id='Pg300'/>
ideals in which the heart and mind of earthly pilgrims find
rest and peace on their long journey to the goal of time. Since
she assumed the mission of Him who said, <q>I am the Way
and the Truth,</q> and, <q>I am with you all days, even unto the
consummation of the world,</q> the Church has travelled a long
way through the centuries, has withstood hard times and fierce
storms. And she has faithfully preserved for mankind the
precious patrimony from God's hand. And now, at the dawn
of new times, her bells proclaimed that she is still alive, holding
the old truths in a strong hand. And after another century
the bells of the globe will ring again, they will, so we hope&mdash;ring
more loudly and more forcefully, over the nations. And
these bells will also ring over the graves of this present generation,
over fallen giants of the forest and over collapsed towers,
over mouldy books, and the wreckage left by a culture that the
emancipated, fallible human mind created, but which truth did
not consecrate. And again the bells will proclaim to a new
century that God, and the world's history, are thinking greater
thoughts than the puny child of man is capable of thinking
within the narrow compass of his years and of his surroundings.
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='301'/><anchor id='Pg301'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fourth Section. Freedom of Teaching.</head>

<pb n='303'/><anchor id='Pg303'/>

<div>
<head>Preliminary Conceptions and Distinctions.</head>

<p>
Acquisition and distribution, labour and communication
of the fruits of labour, are the two factors that determine
the progress of mankind. Thus the precious metal is mined and
brought to the surface by the labourer, whence it speeds through
the world; thus the faithful missionary journeys into remote
countries, to disseminate there the mental treasures acquired by
study and hard religious effort. And thus science desires to work,
and should work, for the culture and progress of mankind, and
this work is pre-eminently its task. To properly pursue this
vocation science demands freedom, <emph>freedom in research and
teaching</emph>. There is, as we have already pointed out, an important
distinction between the two. Although research and teaching
are mostly joined, the former only attaining its chief end in
teaching, there is a real difference between the two elements; and
not unfrequently they are separated. It makes quite a difference
whether some one within the four walls of his room studies
anarchy, or whether he proceeds to proclaim its principles to
the world; it is quite different whether a man embraces atheism
for his personal use only, or whether he makes propaganda for
it from the pulpit; it makes also a world of difference whether
a man is personally convinced that materialism is the sole
truth, or whether he proclaims it as a science, and is able to
affirm that of the German edition of <q>Welträtsel</q> 200,000
copies have been sold, of the English edition about as many, and
that a dozen other translations have spread the fundamental
notions of monism broadcast through the world (<hi rend='italic'>E. Haeckel</hi>,
Monismus u. Naturgesetz). Teaching must be viewed from a
different point. Research is a personal function, whereas Teaching
is a social one. This fact, of itself, makes it evident that
teaching cannot be allowed the same measure of freedom as
<pb n='304'/><anchor id='Pg304'/>
research, hence that teaching must be confined within narrower
limits.
</p>

<p>
But Freedom is demanded not only for research, but also for
teaching, in most cases even an unlimited freedom. It is demanded
as an inalienable right of the individual, it is demanded
in the name of progress, which can be promoted only by new
knowledge. Some countries grant this freedom in their constitutions.
Before discussing this demand and its presumptions,
we shall have to make clear some preliminary conceptions.
</p>

<p>
First, the meaning of <emph>freedom of teaching</emph>. How is it precisely
to be understood? Freedom in teaching in general means,
evidently, exemption from unwarranted restraint in teaching.
Teaching, however, to use the words of a great thinker of the
past, means <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Causare in alio scientiam</foreign>, to impart knowledge
to some one else (<hi rend='italic'>Thomas Aquinas</hi>, Quaest. disp. De verit. q. XI
al.). Thus the pious mother teaches the child truths about
God and Heaven, the school-teacher teaches elementary knowledge,
the college-professor teaches science. Teaching is chiefly
understood to be the instruction by professional teachers, from
grammar school up to university. Hence freedom in teaching
does not necessarily refer to scientific matters only; we may also
speak of a freedom of teaching in the elementary school. As
a rule, however, the term is used in the narrower sense of freedom
in teaching science.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Here it may not be amiss to mention further distinctions. As we
may distinguish in teaching three essentials, namely, the matter, the
method, and the teacher, so there is a corresponding triple freedom of
teaching. If we regard the matter, we meet with the demand, that no
one be excluded in an unjust way from exercising his right to teach,
that no single party should have the monopoly of teaching: the right to
found free universities also belongs here. It is part of the freedom of
teaching. As it has relation to the state, we shall return to this point
later on. A second freedom, which might be called methodological, concerns
the choice of the method. This is naturally subject to considerable
restraint; not only because the academic teacher may frequently have
to get along without desirable paraphernalia, but also because of the
commission he receives with his appointment, wherein his field and scope
are prescribed. This is necessary for the purpose of the university; the
students are to acquire the varied knowledge needed later on in their
vocations of clergyman, lawyer, teacher, or physician. There is frequent
complaint that this freedom in method is abused to a certain extent, that
the students are taught many fragments of science with thoroughness,
<pb n='305'/><anchor id='Pg305'/>
but too little of that which they actually need later on; they are trained
too much for theoretical work and not enough for the practical vocation.
Thus there is limitation here, too. But this is not the freedom in
teaching which occupies the centre of interest to-day.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The trophy for which the battle is waged is the freedom relating
to the <emph>subject</emph> of teaching; we shall term it <q>doctrinal</q>
freedom in teaching: Shall the representative of science be
permitted to promulgate any view he has formed? Even if
that view conflicts with general religious or moral convictions,
with the social order? Or must this freedom be curbed? This
is the question.<note place='foot'><q>The Independent</q> (New York) of Feb. 2, 1914, reports under
the head <emph>freedom of teaching</emph> the dismissal of a professor from the
Presbyterian University at Easton, Pa. After quoting from the charter
article VIII, which provides <q>that persons of every religious denomination
shall be capable of being elected Trustees, nor shall any person,
either as principal, professor, tutor or pupil be refused admittance into
said college, or denied any of the privileges, immunities or advantages
thereof, for or on account of his sentiments in matters of religion,</q> the
report goes on to say: <q>it appears however, from the investigations
of the committee, that President <hi rend='italic'>Warfield</hi> insists that the instruction in
philosophy and psychology has to be such, as, in his opinion, accords
with the most conservative form of Presbyterian theology.</q></note>
</p>

<p>
Obviously, teaching need not always be done <emph>verbally</emph>, it can
be done also by <emph>writing</emph>. The professor lectures in the classrooms,
but he may also expound his theories in books; this latter
the private scholar may also do. In this way <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>
and the Fathers are still teaching by their writings, though their
lips have long been silent. True, this way of teaching has not
the force of the spoken word, vibrating with personal conviction,
but it reaches farther out, with telling effect upon masses and
remote circles. Thus, freedom in teaching includes also the freedom
to print and publish scientific theories, hence it includes part
of the <emph>freedom of the press</emph>; in its full meaning, however,
the freedom of the press relates also to unscientific periodicals,
especially newspapers.
</p>

<p>
A counterpart to the freedom in teaching is presented by the
<emph>freedom in learning</emph>. It concerns the student, and may consist
of the right granted to the <q>academic citizen</q> to choose at his
discretion, but within the restrictions set by his studies, his university,
his teachers, and his curriculum.
</p>

</div>

<pb n='306'/><anchor id='Pg306'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Freedom Of Teaching And Ethics.</head>

<p>
Now for a closer examination of the problem of freedom of
teaching, from the point of <emph>general ethics</emph>, not of law.
This is an important distinction, not seldom overlooked. The
former point of view deals with freedom in teaching only in as
far as regulated or circumscribed by ethical principles, by the
moral principles of conscience, without regard to state-laws or
other positive rules. The freedom in teaching as determined
by governmental decrees may be called freedom of teaching by
state-right. It may happen that the state does not prohibit
the dissemination of doctrines which may be forbidden by reason
and conscience, for instance, atheistical doctrine. There
may be immoral products of art not prohibited by the state;
yet ethics cannot grant license to pornography. The state
grants the liberty of changing from one creed to another, or
of declaring one's self an atheist; yet this does not justify the
act before the conscience. The statutes do not forbid everything
that is morally impermissible; their aim is directed only at
offences against the good of the commonwealth. Moreover, even
such offences may not be prohibited by statute, for the simple
reason that the enactment of such laws may be impossible on
account of the complexion of legislative bodies, or because of
other conditions.
</p>

<p>
We will now take the ethical position and try to judge the
freedom of teaching from this point of view. First of all, we
shall have to explain the <emph>social character</emph> of teaching and the
<emph>responsibility</emph> attached thereto. We start again with the meaning
of freedom of teaching. It demands that the communication
of scientific opinions should not be restrained in unwarranted
manner. <q>In unwarranted manner</q>; because, manifestly, not
all bars are to be removed; no one will assert that a man may
teach things he knows to be false. Every activity, including
<pb n='307'/><anchor id='Pg307'/>
scientific activity, must conform to truth and morals. Hence
there is only the question to determine, when is freedom in
teaching morally reprehensible, and when not; which are the
bars that must not be transgressed, and which bars may be disregarded?
Is it allowed or not to teach any opinion, if the
teacher subjectively believes it to be true? Here the views
differ. However, one thing at present is clear:
</p>

<div>
<head>Freedom of Teaching is Necessary.</head>

<p>
Also in respect to method. Even the teacher in public and
grammar schools, though minutely guided by the plan of instruction,
must be granted, by the demands of pedagogy, a
certain liberty; he should be free to arrange and to try many
things. Only where individual spontaneity is given play will
love for work be aroused, which in turn stimulates devotion to
the cause and makes for success. This applies with even greater
force to the college-professor, in respect to method, course
of instruction, subject, and the results of his research. He must
be free to communicate them, without consideration for unwarranted
prejudices, or for private and party interests.
</p>

<p>
If the scientist were condemned to do nothing but repeat
the old things, without change and variance, without improvement
and correction, without new additions and discoveries, all
alertness and impulse would disappear; but his alacrity and
ardour will increase, if allowed to contribute to progress, if
assured beforehand of publicity for the new solutions he hopes
to find, if allowed to promulgate new discoveries.
</p>

<p>
This freedom is demanded, even more imperatively, by the
vocation of science to work for the progress of mankind, primarily
for the intellectual and through this for the general
progress. The demand in behalf of the individual is even
more urgent in behalf of science at large: no standing still,
ever onward to new knowledge and the enrichment of the mind,
to moral uplift, to a beautifying of life&mdash;and ultimately to the
glorification of God! For, verily, the purpose of the whole universe
is the glory of the Creator. Glory is given to Him by
the world of stars, as they speed through space, conforming
<pb n='308'/><anchor id='Pg308'/>
to His laws; glory is given to Him by the dewdrop, as it
reflects the rays of the morning sun; glory is given to Him
by the butterfly, as it unfolds the brilliancy of colours received
from His hand. The chief glory of all is given to Him by the
reason-endowed human mind, developing its powers ever more
fully, the crowning achievement of visible creation, wherein
God's wisdom reflects brighter than the sun in the morning-dew.
And for this is needed the freedom of scientific progress,
which would be impossible without a freedom in teaching.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
And this applies not only to fixed conclusions; it must also be permitted,
within admissible bounds, to teach scientific <emph>hypotheses</emph>.
Science needs them for its progress; they are the buds that burst
forth into blossoms. Had men like <hi rend='italic'>Copernicus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Huygens</hi>, not
been free to propound their hypotheses, the sun would still revolve
around the earth, we still would have <hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy's</hi> revolution of the
spheres, and the results of optical science would be denied us.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>A Twofold Freedom of Teaching and Its Presumption.</head>

<p>
There cannot be any doubt that science must have freedom
in teaching. But of what kind? One that is necessary and
suitable. Yes, but what kind of freedom is that? Here is the
crux of the question. Now we are again at the boundary line
where we stood, when defining the freedom of science in general,
at the parting of the ways of two contrary conceptions of
man.
</p>

<p>
One is the Christian idea, and also that of unbiassed reason.
Man is a limited creature, depending on God, on truth
and moral law, at the same time dependent on social life, hence
also dependent on social order and authority; consequently he
cannot claim independence, but only the freedom compatible
with his position. Therefore the barriers demanded by truth
and by the duty of belief are set to his research; hence his
freedom in teaching can only be the one permitted by his social
position; personal perception of truth <emph>and</emph> consideration for
the welfare of mankind will be the barriers of this freedom.
</p>

<p>
This view is opposed by another, claiming full independence
for both research and teaching, a claim prompted by the modern
philosophy of <emph>free humanity</emph>, which sees in man an autonomous
<pb n='309'/><anchor id='Pg309'/>
being, who needs only follow the immanent impulses of his
own individuality; and this especially in that activity which
is deemed the most perfect, the pursuit of science: this hypostatized
collective-being of the highest human pursuit is also to be
the supreme bearer of autonomism. As a matter of course this
results in the claim for unlimited freedom in teaching, a freedom
we shall term <emph>liberal</emph>: in communicating his scientific view the
scientist need merely be guided by his perception of truth, without
any considerations for external authorities or interests, provided
his communication is a scientific one, viz., observing the
usual form of scientific teaching. This latter limitation is usually
added, because this freedom is to apply to the teaching
of <emph>science</emph> only; to the popular presentation of scientific views,
appealing directly to the masses, such a freedom is not always
conceded.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Research,</q> we are told, <q>demands full freedom, with no other
barrier but its own desire for truth, hence the academic teacher
who teaches in the capacity of an investigator is likewise not to
know any barriers but his inner truthfulness and propriety.</q> <q>In
this sense we demand to-day freedom in teaching for our universities.
The freedom of the scientist and of the academic teacher
must not be constrained by any patented truth, nor by faint-hearted
consideration. We let the word of the Bible comfort us: <q>if this
doctrine is of God, it will endure; if not, it will pass away</q></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann</hi>).
Whatever the academic teacher produces from his subjective
veracity must be inviolable; he may proclaim it as truth, regardless
of consequences. <q>The searching scientist,</q> so says another, <q>must
consider only the one question: What is truth? But inasmuch as there
cannot be research without communication(?), we must go a step
further: the teaching, too, must not be restricted. The scientific
writer has to heed but one consideration: How can I present the
things exactly as I perceive them, in the clearest and most precise
manner?</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>). <q>Scientific research and the communication
of its results must, conformable to its purpose, be independent of
any consideration not innate in the scientific method itself,&mdash;hence independent
of the traditions and prejudices of the masses, independent
of authorities and social groups, independent of interested parties.
That this independence is indispensable needs no demonstration.</q>
<q>Nor can any limitation of the freedom of research and teaching be
deduced from the official position of the scientist or teacher</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Von
Amira</hi>). Just as soon as he begins his research according to scientific
method, <hi rend='italic'>i.e.</hi>, adapts his thoughts to scientific rules, customs, and postulates,
he may question Christianity, God, everything; neither state nor
Church must object, no matter if thousands are led astray.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='310'/><anchor id='Pg310'/>

<p>
This freedom is pre-eminently claimed for philosophical and
religious thought, for ideas relating to views of the world and
the foundations of social order; because only in this province
is absolute freedom of teaching likely to be seriously refused.
In mathematics and the natural sciences, in philology and kindred
sciences, there is hardly occasion for it; there only petty
disputes occur, differences among competitors, things that do
not reach beyond the precinct of the learned fraternity.
Whether one is for or against the theory of three-dimensional
space, for or against the theory of ions and the like, all that
touches very little on the vital questions of mankind; but the
case is quite different when it comes to publicly advocating the
abolition of private property, to the preaching of polygamy: it is
here where great clashes threaten. Here, also, there enter into
the plan the social powers, whose duty it is to shield the highest
possessions of human society against wanton attack. Nevertheless
the demand is for unlimited freedom in teaching. What,
then, are the arguments used in giving to this exceptional claim
the semblance of justification? This shall be the first question.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Unlimited Freedom in Teaching not Demanded.</head>

<div>
<head>1. Not by Veracity.</head>

<p>
Veracity is appealed to first; it obligates the teacher, so it is
said, to announce his own convictions unreservedly, for to
<q>deny one's own convictions would offend against one of the
most positive principles of morals</q>; hence the academic
teacher could not grant to the state the right to set a barrier
in this respect, <q>it would be a violation of the duty of
veracity, which is innate to the teacher's office</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Von Amira</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Was it realized in making this claim what the duty of
truthfulness really demands? This duty is complied with
when one is not untruthful, that is to say, does not state something
to be his opinion when secretly he believes the contrary to
be true; to force him to do this would of course be instigating untruthfulness.
Truthfulness, however, does not require any one to
speak out publicly what he thinks; one may be silent. Or is cautious
<pb n='311'/><anchor id='Pg311'/>
silence untruthfulness? It is oftentimes prudence, but not
untruthfulness. There is a considerable difference between
thinking and communicating thought, even to the scientist.
</p>

<p>
Or is the scientist <emph>obliged</emph>, for instance, to proclaim publicly
views he has formed contrary to the prevailing principles of
morals,&mdash;views he calls the <q>results of his research,</q> so that
mankind at last may learn the truth? Was <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi> in duty
bound to proclaim to the wide world his revolutionary ideas?
Any sober-minded man might have told him he need not worry
about this duty. Has the teacher of science this duty? How
will he prove it? How are they going to prove that it is
incumbent upon an atheistic college-professor to teach his
atheism also to others? Or, must he teach that the fundamental
principles of Christian marriage are untenable, if this has
become his personal opinion? Is it, perhaps, impossible for
him to refrain from such teaching in the lectures he is appointed
to give? This view will mostly prove a delusion. A
conscientious examination of his opinion would convince him
that he, too, had better abandon it, since it is merely an aberration
of his mind. But let us assume that he could neither correct
his views nor refrain from proclaiming them, that he would
declare: <q>I should lie if, in discussing the question in how
far this or that public institution is morally sanctioned, I were
to halt before certain institutions; for instance if, having the
moral conviction that monarchy is a morally objectionable institution,
I omitted to say so</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Th. Lipps</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Well, he has the option to change his branch of teaching, or
to resign his office; he is not indispensable, no one forces him
to retain his office. Indeed, he owes it to <emph>truthfulness</emph> to leave
his post the very instant he finds he is not able to occupy
it in a beneficial way; he owes it to <emph>honesty</emph> to yield his
position, if he has lost the proper relation to religion, state, and
the people, to whom his position is to render service.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>2. Not the Duty of Science.</head>

<p>
<q>Nevertheless,</q> we are told, <q>the representatives of science
have the duty of freely communicating their opinions; they are
<pb n='312'/><anchor id='Pg312'/>
called by people and state to find the truth for the great multitude,
that is not itself in the position to pursue laborious
research. Where else could it get the truth but from science?</q>
<q>The multitude participates in truth generally in
a receptive, passive manner; only a few pre-eminent minds are
destined by nature to be the dispensers and promoters of knowledge</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>), and with this vocation of science a restriction
of its freedom of speech would be incompatible.
</p>

<p>
The idea has something enticing about it. It also has its
justification, if the matter at issue concerns things outside of
the common scope of human knowledge, such as the more precise
research of nature, of history, and so on. But the idea
is not warranted when applied to the higher questions of human
life. Here it is based on the false premise that man cannot
arrive at the certain possession of truth without scientific research.
We have demonstrated previously how this notion involves
a total misconception of the nature of human thought.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
There is, beside the scientific certainty, another true certainty,
a natural certainty, the only one we have in most matters, and a
safe guide to mankind especially in higher questions, nay, in general
much safer than science, which, as proved by history, goes easily astray
in such matters. Long before there was a science, mankind possessed
the truth about the principles of life; and it possesses this truth still,
through common sense and, even more, through divine revelation,
which offers enlightenment to every one regardless of science. Here
apply the words of the poet:
</p>

<lg>
<l><q rend='pre'>Das Wahre ist schon laengst gefunden</q></l>
<l>Hat edle Geisterschaar verbunden</l>
<l><q rend='post'>Das alte Wahre, fasst es an!</q></l>
</lg>

</quote>

<p>
Nevertheless, it is claimed, science remains the sole guide to
truth and progress. Must not truth be searched for and struggled
for always anew? There are no patented truths for all
times&mdash;each age must sketch its own image of the world, must
form new values. And it is for science to point out these
new roads. Therefore, full swing for its doctrines. <q>Science
knows not of statutes of limitations or prescription, hence of
no absolutely established possession. Consequently real, scientific,
instruction can only mean absolutely free instruction</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>). We may be brief. Every line bears the imprint of
<pb n='313'/><anchor id='Pg313'/>
that sceptical subjectivism which we have met so often as the
philosophical presumption of modern freedom of science.
It is the wisdom of ancient sophistry, which even Aristotle
stigmatized as a <q>sham-science,</q> <q>a running after something
that invariably slips away.</q> A freedom in teaching with such
a theory of cognition can never be a factor of mental progress,
least of all when it seeks to rise above a God-given, Christian
truth to <q>higher</q> forms of religion. This, however, is often
the very progress for which freedom in teaching is intended&mdash;the
unhindered propagation of an anti-Christian view of the
world.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>3. No Innate Right.</head>

<p>
Very well, we are told, leave aside the appeal to the province
of science; but it cannot be denied that man has at least an
innate right of communicating his thoughts in the freest manner.
The first right of the human individual, a right which
must not be curtailed in any way, is his right to free development
according to his inner laws, provided the freedom of
the fellow-man is not thereby injured. Hence every man has
the right of freely uttering his opinion, in science especially,
because the free right of others is thereby not infringed upon
in any matter whatsoever.
</p>

<p>
This is the claim. It is again rooted in the autonomy of
the human subject, the main idea of the liberal view of life, and,
at the same time, the principal presumption of its freedom
of science. It leads to the <emph>individualistic theory of rights</emph>,
which declares freedom to be man's self-sufficient object, viz.,
freedom in all things regardless of the weal and woe of
others, no matter if the sequel be error, scandal, or seduction,
if only the strict right to freedom be not violated.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Act outwardly so,</q> says the philosophic preceptor of autonomism,
<q>that the free use of thy free will may be consistent with the liberty of
others according to a general law.</q> <q>This liberty,</q> continues <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>,
<q>is the sole, original right of every man by virtue of his humanity.</q>
And <hi rend='italic'>Spencer</hi> concurrently teaches: <q>Every one is free to do what he
wants, as long as he does not infringe upon the liberty of others.</q>
</p>

<p>
This is termed the <q>Maxim of Co-existence.</q> Accordingly any
one may say and write anything at will, no matter if people are led
<pb n='314'/><anchor id='Pg314'/>
astray by his errors. Even the government must in no way limit this
freedom, except where rights are violated; to defend religion and
morals against attacks, to guard innocence and inexperience against
seduction, is, according to this theory, not allowed to the state.
<hi rend='italic'>W. von Humboldt</hi> writes: <q>He who utters things or commits actions,
offending the conscience or the morals of other people, may act immorally:
but unless he is guilty of obtrusiveness, he does not injure
any right.</q> Hence the state must not interfere. <q>Even the assuredly
graver case, when the witnessing of an action, the listening to certain
reasoning, would mislead the virtue or the thought of others, even
this case would not permit restraint of freedom.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We are dealing here with that misconception of the social
nature of man which has always characterized liberalism. It
knows only of the right and liberty of the individual; of
his duties to society it knows nothing, not even that men should
not injure the possessions of others, but rather promote them;
nor does it know that men are placed in a society that requires
the free will of the individual to yield to the common weal of
the many. To liberal thought human society is only an accidental
aggregation of individuals, not connected by social unity.
The autonomous spheres of the single individuals are rolling side
by side, each one for itself: wherever it pleases them to roll,
there they are carried by the autonomous centre of gravity,
whatever they upset in their career has no right to complain.
This principle of freedom was given free rein in the economical
legislation of the nineteenth century. Free enterprise, free
development of energy, was the rallying cry; the result was
devastation and wreckage.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<div>
<head>Unrestricted Freedom of Teaching Inadmissible.</head>

<p>
Hence the claim for absolute freedom in teaching is not warranted;
on the contrary, its chief arguments are borrowed from
a philosophy that is unacceptable to the Christian mind. Is it
even admissible? Though not warranted, is it permissible at
least from the viewpoint of ethics? It is not even this. The
claim is ethically inadmissible, because the <emph>religious, moral,
and social</emph> institutions, especially the <emph>Christian faith</emph> and
the Christian morals of mankind, would be seriously injured.
<pb n='315'/><anchor id='Pg315'/>
In other words: The claim that it is permissible to proclaim
scientific theories which are apt to do great <emph>damage</emph> to the
foundations of religious, moral, and social life, especially to
Christian conviction and morals, is ethically reprehensible.
</p>

<p>
A few remarks in explanation. We merely speak here of the
freedom in teaching relating to the philosophical-religious
foundations of life; that it cannot be the subject of serious
objection in other matters we have previously mentioned. Nor
do we yet inquire what social powers should fix the needed
limitations, whether state or Church should regulate them;
we are merely investigating, from the viewpoint of ethics, what
barriers are set by the law of reason, and would have to be set
even in the absence of state laws, because of the important influence
exercised by scientific doctrine upon the social life&mdash;the
social welfare of mankind is the consideration beside the truth
that is decisive in considering freedom in teaching.
</p>

<p>
The teacher or writer may himself be of the opinion that
his pernicious errors are not dangerous; he may fancy them
even of utmost importance to the world; hence he thinks he has
the right, even the duty, to communicate them to the world.
And do we not hear them all assure us that they desire only the
truth? We do not wish to sit in judgment on the good faith
of them individually; we make no comment when a man like
<hi rend='italic'>D. F. Strauss</hi>, looking back upon the forty years of his career
as a writer, vouches for his unwavering and pure aim for
truth; and when even <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> asserts this of himself. Every
fallacy has made its appearance with this avowal.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
But, by way of parenthesis, there is no reason to boast in a general
way of the sincere aim at truth and the pure mind for the ideal,
alleged to prevail in the modern literature of our times, especially in
philosophical literature. He who stands upon Christian ground knows
that the denial of a personal God, of immortality and other matters,
are errors of gravest consequence. Furthermore, if one is convinced
of the capability of man to recognize the truth, at least in the most
important matters, and if one knows that God has made His Revelation
the greatest manifestation in history, and proved it sufficiently by
documents&mdash;indeed, had to prove it; that He will let all who are of good
will come to the knowledge of the truth; then it remains incomprehensible
how modern philosophy considered as a whole is said on the one
hand to be guided by a sincere desire for truth, while on the other
hand it clings with hopeless obstinacy to the most radical errors.
</p>

<pb n='316'/><anchor id='Pg316'/>

<p>
Such talk of general sincere searching for truth is apt to deceive the
inexperienced. He who has obtained a deeper insight into modern
philosophy, he who steadily watches it at work, will recall to mind
only too often the word of the Holy Ghost: <q>For there shall be a
time when they will not endure sound doctrine, but according to their
own desires shall they heap to themselves teachers ... and will indeed
turn away their hearing from the truth and shall be turned
unto fables</q> (2 Tim. iv. 3).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Even if the teacher is himself convinced of the truth and
inoffensiveness of his theory, it does not follow by any means
that society is obliged to receive it. Indeed not. The
state prohibits cults dangerous to the common weal: it does
not intend to suffer damage just because the adherents of such
cults may be in good faith. And if some one thinks himself
called to deliver a people from its legitimate ruler, let it be
undecided whether his purpose is good or not, he will nevertheless
be restrained by rather drastic means from proceeding
according to his idea. This proves that the principle of <q>no
barrier but one's own veracity</q> is not conceded in practical
life. The teacher and author, this is the sense of our
thesis, must ever be conscious of the grave responsibility of
science, against whose power the unscientific are so often defenceless;
his great duty will be to make use of this power
with utmost compunction, to teach nothing whereof he is not
fully convinced, nor to announce for truth anything he is still
investigating.
</p>

<p>
As we turn to the demonstration of our proposition, a
start from the <emph>definition of scientific teaching</emph> suggests
itself; manifestly this must be decisive for the measure of
its freedom. No doubt, its purpose obviously is: to promote the
weal of mankind by communicating the truth, by guarding
men against errors, especially against those which would most
harm them, by elevating and increasing the blessings of this
life: for knowledge guides man in all his steps, it is the light
on his way.
</p>

<p>
Science is not self-sufficient. It is an equally false and
pernicious notion to make science a sovereign authority, throning
above man, who must pay homage, and subordinate his
interests to it, but which he must not ask to serve him for
<pb n='317'/><anchor id='Pg317'/>
his own ends in life. There are such notions of science and
also of art. Art, too, it is sometimes claimed, should serve its
own ends only; the demand, that it should edify, or promote
the ideals of society, is deemed a desertion of its purposes,
<q>the furtherance of worldly or heavenly ideals may be eliminated
from its task</q> (<hi rend='italic'>E. von Hartmann</hi>). These are the excrescences
of unclarified cultural thoughts. Since man and his
culture is more and more replacing the divine Ideal, this culture
itself has grown to be the overshadowing ideal of the Deity, without
whom evidently man cannot live. The Egyptians worshipped
Sun and Moon; modern man often burns incense before the
products of his own mind. It is a reversal of the right proportion.
Science and its doctrine are activities of life, results of the
human mind. Activities of life, however, have man for their end,
they are to develop and perfect him: man does not exist for
the clothes he wears&mdash;the clothes exist on account of man; the
leaves exist for the sake of the tree that puts them forth, nor
can grapes be of more importance than the vine that has produced
them.
</p>

<p>
Hence, where science does not serve this end, where it in
consequence becomes not a blessing, but an injury to man,
where it tears down, instead of building up, there it forfeits
the right to exist; it is no longer a fruitful bough on the tree
of humanity, but a harmful outgrowth. Like every organism
actively opposes its harmful growths, society, too, must not
tolerate within its bosom any scientific tendencies which act
as malign germs, perhaps attack its very marrow.
</p>

<p>
From the true object of science, as above stated, it follows that
it is wrong to disseminate doctrines that are apt to injure mankind
in the possession of the truth, which may even imperil the
authenticated foundations of life. For nobody will deny that
firm foundations are needed to uphold and support the highest
ideals of life; they can no more withstand a constant jarring and
shaking than can a house of frame and stone. Such foundations
are, first of all, the moral and religious truths and convictions
about the Whence and Whither of human life, about
God and the hereafter, the social duties toward the fellow-man,
obedience to authority, and so on. If man is to perform
<pb n='318'/><anchor id='Pg318'/>
burdensome duties as husband and father, if, as a citizen, he
is to do justice to others and yield in obedience to authority, he
must have powerful motives; else his impulses will take the
helm, the sensible, moral being becomes a sensual being who
reverses the order and drives the ship of life towards the cataract
of ethical and social revolution. And these motives must
rest deeply in the mind, like the foundation that supports the
house; they must become identified with it, as the vital principle
penetrates the tree, as the instinct of the animal is part
of its innermost being. If new notions are continually whizzing
without resistance through the mind, like the wind over the
fields, repose and permanence are impossible in human life.
To jolt the foundations invites collapse and ruin.
</p>

<p>
It is the duty of self-preservation, for which every being
strives, that society guard these foundations of order against
subversion and capricious experimentation. Of the Locrians it
is told that any one desiring to offer a resolution for changing
existing laws, was required to appear at the public meeting with
a rope around his neck. He was hanged with it if he failed to win
his fellow-citizens over to his view. This custom pictures the
necessity of erecting a powerful dam against the inundation by
illicit mental tidal waves, that endanger the stability of the
order of life. This, of course, does not oppose every new progress.
In building a house, firm foundations do not prevent the
house from growing in size; but the foundations are a necessary
preliminary to a suitable construction. Under no circumstances
must a man be permitted, in his individualistic mania
for reform, to lay an impious hand at the fundamental principles
of life; and the scientist must bear in mind the fact that
it is not the task and privilege of his individualistic reason
to put the seal of approval on these principles as if the truth
had never before been discovered.
</p>

<p>
To <emph>Christian</emph> nations the immutable truths of Christianity
are these safe foundations. They are vouched for by divine
authority, they have stood all historical tests of fitness; they
sustain the institutions of family and of government, they
determine thought, education, the ideas of right and wrong&mdash;a
venerable patrimony of the nations. Shall every <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>,
<pb n='319'/><anchor id='Pg319'/>
big or little, be free to attack them? Experiments may be made
with rabbits, flowers, or drugs; but it would violate the first
principle of prudence and justice to allow every Tom, Dick, and
Harry, who may have the neological itch, to experiment on the
highest institutions of mankind.
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Primum non nocere</foreign> is an old caution to the physician; for
many medical practitioners and surgeons not an untimely admonition.
It is asserted, and vouched for by proof, that patients
are made the subjects of experiment for purposes of science;
not, indeed, rich people, but the poor in hospitals and clinics
(comp. <hi rend='italic'>A. Moll</hi>, Arztliche Ethik, 1902). Every conscientious
physician will turn with moral abhorrence from such action.
Indeed, man and his greatest possession, life, is not to be
made the victim of scientific experiment. If this holds good
as to the physical things of life, then how much more of the
ideal things of mankind!
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head><q>Every One to Form His Own Judgment</q>?</head>

<p>
But, then, cannot every one decide for himself as to the teachings
of science, and reject whatever he thinks to be false? Then
would be avoided all damage that might result from a freedom
in teaching. Science does not force its opinion upon any one.
With due respect for the discernment of its disciples, science
lays its results before them, leaving it to them to judge and
choose, whatever they think is good.
</p>

<p>
Such words voice the optimism of an inexperienced idealism.
To be sure, were the devotee to science, be he a student at a
university or a reader of scientific works, a clear-sighted diagnostician,
who could at once perceive error, and, moreover, if
he were a mathematical entity, without personal interest in
the matter, the argument might be listened to. But any one
past the immaturity of youth, he, especially, who has earnestly
commenced to know himself, is aware that unfortunately the
opposite is the case.
</p>

<p>
First the lack of ability to <emph>distinguish error from truth</emph>.
Even when recognized, error is not without danger; it shares
with truth the property to act suggestively, especially when
<pb n='320'/><anchor id='Pg320'/>
it repeatedly and with assurance approaches the mind. And
often error does pose with great assurance, as the result of science,
as the conclusion of the superior mind of the teacher, perhaps
of a famous teacher! It is taken for granted that whatever
serious men assert in the name of science must be right; or, if
not that, there is the overawing feeling that there must be some
justification for the confidence of the assertion. Authority impresses
even without argument, and impresses the more strongly,
the less there is of intellectual independence. The latter is at
lowest ebb at the youthful age. That which in hypnotic suggestion
is intensified into the morbid: the effective psychical
transfer of one's own thought into some one else, occurs in
a lesser form through the influence of the morbid scepsis of
our times; it is a poisonous atmosphere, affecting imperceptively
the susceptible mind which remains long in it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For this reason the religious savant, who has to do a great deal with
infidel books, must be on his watch incessantly, even though he has
the knowledge and the intellect to detect wrong conclusions. Thus we
find that great scholars often display a striking fear of irreligious
books. Of Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Mai</hi> it is told: <q>He said&mdash;and this we can vouch
for&mdash;<q>I have the permission to read forbidden books; but I never
make use of it nor do I intend to do so</q></q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hilger</hi>, Der Index, 1905, 41).
</p>

<p>
The learned <hi rend='italic'>L. A. Muratori</hi> wrote a refutation of a heretic book. In
the preface he thought it necessary to apologize for having read the
book. He said: <q>The book got into my hands very late, and for a
long time I could not get myself to read it. For why should one read
the writings of innovators except to commit one's self to their folly? I
seek and like books which confirm my faith, but not those which
would lead me away from my religion. But when I heard that the
book was circulated in Italy, I resolved to muster up my strength for
the defence of truth and religion, and for the safety of my brethren.</q>
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Saint Francis of Sales</hi>, with touching simplicity, gives in his
writings praise to God for having preserved him from losing his
faith through the reading of heretical books. Of the learned Spanish
philosopher <hi rend='italic'>Balmes</hi> is preserved a saying that he once addressed to two
of his friends: <q>You know, the faith is deeply rooted in my heart.
Nevertheless, I cannot read a fallacious book without feeling the
necessity of regaining the right mood by reading Holy Writ, the
Imitation of Christ, and the writings of blessed <hi rend='italic'>Louis of Granada</hi>.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What then must happen when the needed training is lacking?
when one easily grasps the objections to the truth, but
cannot find the answer? when one is not in a position to ascertain
<pb n='321'/><anchor id='Pg321'/>
whether the asserted facts are based on truth, whether
something important is kept back, whether there are stated positive
facts, or mere hypotheses, or perhaps even idle suppositions?
If one is not capable to recognize wrong conclusions, to note
the ambiguities of words? Our present treatise cites proof of
it. How many earnest men, who in good faith are the warm
advocates of freedom of science, are aware how ambiguous that
term is; how a whole theory of cognition and view of the world
is hidden behind it? How many can at once see the ambiguity
of phrases like <q>Difference between knowledge and faith,</q> of
<q>experiencing one's religion,</q> of <q>evolution and progress,</q> of
<q>humanism,</q> of <q>unfolding personality</q>? And of the self-conscious
postulate that science cannot reckon with supernatural
factors, how many perceive that it is nothing but an
undemonstrated supposition? We are told that all great representatives
of science reject the Christian view of the world;
who knows at once that such assertion is untrue? We read that
the Copernican theory was condemned by Rome, even prohibited
up to 1835, and this cannot fail to make an impression; but the
part omitted in the story, who will at once supplement or even
suspect it?
</p>

<p>
Then there is the great <emph>want of philosophical training</emph>.
Formerly a thorough philosophical education was the indispensable
condition for maturity, and considered the indispensable
foundation for higher studies. All this has changed; frequently
there is not even the desire for philosophical training. Of
course, modern philosophy in its present state does not promise
much of benefit. <q>Students of medicine and law remain for the
larger part without any philosophical education, and among those
of the other two faculties but few students do better than come
into a more or less superficial touch with philosophy</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
The consequence is, they cannot scientifically get their bearings
in respect to ultimate questions, and easily lose their faith,
succumbing to errors and sophisms.
</p>

<p>
Imagine a young man, untrained; in books, in the lecture
room, in his intercourse, everywhere, he is courted by a disbelieving
science, with its theories, its objections, its doubts,&mdash;tension
everywhere that is not relieved, accusations that are
<pb n='322'/><anchor id='Pg322'/>
not explained; how is he to bring with a steady hand order in
all this? To clinch it, he hears the obtrusive exhortation to
form forthwith his own conviction by his own reasoning!
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
He is, moreover, likely to be informed as follows: <q>The university
is a place for mental struggle, for incessant investigation of inherited
opinions. For years and years the student was fed with prescribed
matter which he had to swallow believingly, ... at last the moment
has arrived when he can choose and decide for himself. True, this
freedom of mental choice&mdash;and it is the essence of academic freedom&mdash;has
also its anguish. But how magnificent it is, on the other hand,
when the gloomy walls of the classroom vanish, and the bright ether of
research dawns into view with its wide horizon! He who cannot grasp
and enjoy this moment in its grandeur and exquisiteness, he who prefers
to the free life of the colt on the vast prairies the dull existence in a
narrow fold ... he has taken the wrong road when he came to the
gates of the Alma Mater to study worldly science&mdash;he should have remained
at the restful hearth of the pious, parental home, in the shadow
of the old village-church</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What a lack of earnestness and of knowledge of man, what lack
of the sense of responsibility! Of young men, without thorough
philosophical and theological preparation, it is demanded to
doubt at once their Christian religion, despite all compunctions
of their conscience, and to argue the dangerous theses of an
anti-Christian view of the world. They are expected, as if they
were heirs to the wisdom of all centuries, to judge and correct
forthwith that which their teachers call the result of their long
studies&mdash;for they are not supposed to follow them blindly,
they are expected to sit in judgment over theological tendencies
and philosophical systems, and to struggle through doubts and
aberrations, untouched by error, to display a mental independence
which even the man of highest learning lacks. Such a
knowledge of human nature might be left to itself, if the wrecks
it causes were not so saddening.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>How terrible is the power of science!</q> a voice of authority warned
a short time ago. <q>The unlearned are defenceless against the learned,
those who know little against those that know much; the unlearned
are incapable of independently judging the theories of the learned;
error in the garb of knowledge impresses them with the force of truth,
especially when it finds an ally in their evil lusts. No wielder of
state-power can lay waste, can destroy, as much as an unconscientious,
or even merely careless, wielder of the weapons of knowledge.
<pb n='323'/><anchor id='Pg323'/>
Exalted as is the pursuit of knowledge, and as knowledge itself is if
guided by strong moral sentiment and earnest conscience, so degraded
it becomes if it tears itself from the self-control of conscience. This
fatal rupture will happen the instant science deviates but a hair's
breadth from the truth it can vouch for upon conscientious examination....
Sacred is the freedom of science keeping within the bounds
of the moral laws; but transgressing them it is no longer science, but a
farce staged with scientific technique, a negation of the essence of
science</q> (Count <hi rend='italic'>A. Apponyi</hi>, former Hungarian Minister of Education,
officiating at a <hi rend='italic'>Promotio sub auspiciis</hi>, 1908).
</p>

<p>
In the year 1877, at the Fiftieth Congress of Natural Scientists in
Munich, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>R. Virchow</hi>, founder and leader of the Progressive Party
in Germany, sounded a warning to be conscientious in the use of the
freedom in teaching, and in the first place, to announce as the result
of science nothing but what has been demonstrated beyond doubt:
<q>I am of the opinion that we are actually in danger of jeopardizing
the future by making too much use of the freedom offered to us by
present conditions, and I would caution not to continue in the arbitrary
personal speculation, which spreads itself nowadays in many branches
of natural science. We must make rigid distinction between that
which we teach and that which is the object of research. The subjects
of our research are problems. But a problem should not be made
a subject of teaching. In teaching, we have to remain within the
small, and yet large domain which we actually control. Any attempt
to model our problems into doctrines, to introduce our conjectures
as the foundation of education, must fail, especially the attempt to
simply depose the Church and to replace its dogma without ceremony
by evolutionary religion; indeed, gentlemen, this attempt must fail,
but in failing it will carry with it the greatest dangers for science in
general.... We must set ourselves the task, in the first place, to hand
down the actual, the real knowledge, and, in going further, we must
tell our students invariably: This, however, is not proved, it is <emph>my</emph>
opinion, <emph>my</emph> notion, <emph>my</emph> theory, <emph>my</emph> speculation.... Gentlemen, I think
we would misuse our power, and endanger our power, if in teaching we
would not restrict ourselves to this legitimate province.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
And is nothing known of the inclinations and passions, especially
of the youthful heart, to which truth is so often a heavy
yoke, constraining and oppressing them? Will they not try to
use every means to relieve the tension? Will they not gravitate
by themselves to a science that tells them the old religion with
its oppressive dogmas, its unworldly morals, is a stage of evolution
long since passed by, and that many other things, once
called sin by obsolete prejudices, are the justified utterances of
nature? Will they not worship this science as their liberator?
He who once said <q>I am the truth,</q> He was crucified; a sign
for all ages. Base nature will at all times crucify the truth.
<pb n='324'/><anchor id='Pg324'/>
<hi rend='italic'>F. Coppée</hi>, a member of the French Academy, led back by severe
sickness to the faith of his youth, relates the following in his confessions:
<q>I was raised a Christian, and fulfilled the religious duties
with zeal even for some years after my first Holy Communion. What
made me deviate from my pious habits were, I confess it openly, the
aberrations of youthful age and the loathing to make certain confessions.
Quite many who are in the same position will admit,
if they will be frank, that at the beginning they were estranged
from their creed by the severe law which religion imposes on all in
respect to sensuality, and only in later years they felt the want to
extenuate and justify the transgressions of the moral law by a
scientific system.</q> <q>Having taken the first step on the downward
road, I could not fail to read books, listen to words, see examples,
which confirmed my notion that nothing can be more warranted
but that man obey his pride and his sensuality; and soon I became
totally indifferent in respect to religion. As will be seen, my case is
an everyday case.</q>
</p>

<p>
Only exalted moral purity can keep the mind free from being made
captive and dragged down by the passions.
</p>

<p>
In a college town in southern Germany a Catholic Priest some
time ago met a college girl who belonged to a club of monists.
They started upon a discussion, and soon the college girl had no argument
left. But as a last shot she exclaimed, <q>Well, you cannot prevent
me from hating your God.</q>
</p>

<p>
Prof. <hi rend='italic'>G. Spicker</hi> relates in his autobiography instructive reminiscences
of his college years. Religiously trained in his youth, and
in his early years for some time a Capuchin, he left this Order to go to
the university. Previous to this he had been led to doubt by the
perusal of modern philosophical writings, and at Munich he sank still
more deeply into doubt. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Huber</hi> advised him to hear the radical
<hi rend='italic'>Prantl</hi>. In his dejection he went to a fellow-student in quest of
comfort, and received the significant advice: <q>Indeed, <hi rend='italic'>Huber</hi> is right:
you are not a bit of a philosopher; you still believe in sin, that is
only a theological notion; go and hear <hi rend='italic'>Prantl</hi>, he'll rid you of your
fancies.</q> Of the impression <hi rend='italic'>Prantl's</hi> lectures made upon the susceptible
young students he relates: <q>They were especially overawed by
his passionate enthusiasm, his trenchant criticism, his sarcastic treatment
of everything mediocre and superficial, and, chiefly, by his self-conscious,
authoritative, demeanor. Like a tornado he swept through
hazy, obscure regions, whether in science, art, poetry, or religion.
Even by only attending the lectures one became more conscious of one's
knowledge and looked down with silent contempt upon semi-philosophers
and theologians.</q> In regard to himself he admits that a few weeks
sufficed to destroy the last remnants of his former religious persuasion:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Huber's</hi> prophecy was completely fulfilled, the last stump of my
dogmatic belief was smashed into a thousand splinters.</q>
</p>

<p>
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Vae mundo a scandalis!</foreign> What a responsibility rests especially upon
those who become the scandal for inexperienced youth!
</p>

<p>
In the upper classes of a largely Protestant college in northern
Germany the professor of mathematics, some years ago, asked the
<pb n='325'/><anchor id='Pg325'/>
question, who among the students had read <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel's</hi> <q>Weltraetsel.</q>
All except four or five rose to their feet. Upon his further question,
who of them believed in what is said in the book, about half of the
classroom rose. <q>The immature youth who read the <q>Weltraetsel,</q></q>
so says <hi rend='italic'>A. Hansen</hi>, <q>unfortunately conclude: <q><hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> says there is no
God, therefore we may boldly live as it suits our natural immorality....</q>
Is <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> the strong mind to assume for a long future
the responsibility for this conclusion?</q>
</p>

<p>
One is frightened by the manner the highest ideals of mankind
are often juggled with, what they dare offer with easy conscience
to the tenderest youth. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Forel</hi> is known by his widely spread
book on <q>The Sexual Question,</q> perhaps better known even by his
lectures on the subject, which some cities prohibited in the interest of
public morals. In the seventh edition of his book we find published
as a testimonial, also as proof of the good reading the book makes for
early youth, a letter of a young woman whose opinion of the book
had been requested by the author. Her answer reads: <q>You ask me
what impression your book made upon me. I should state that I
am very young, but have read a great deal. My mother has given
me a very liberal education, and so I have a right to count myself
among the unprejudiced girls.</q> She assures the author: <q>I never
thought for a single moment that your book was immoral, hence I
do not believe that you have corrupted me.</q> And such books are
offered to young girls as fit reading!
</p>

<p>
Some years ago a sensation was created when in Berlin a young
author, twenty-two years of age, <hi rend='italic'>George Scheufler</hi> by name, killed himself.
Though of a religious training, he began at an early age to read
the writings of infidel natural scientists and philosophers. His belief
became weaker and weaker, and he finally abandoned it entirely. Only
a few years afterwards, the young man, who had become a writer of
repute, put a revolver to his heart, nauseated by the world, tortured by
religious doubts. An organ of modern infidelity commented upon
the event in the cold words: <q>The truth is probably that the undoubtedly
talented author had not nerves strong enough for the Berlin
life, hence he dies. May his ashes rest in peace!</q> Heartless words on
the misfortune of a poor victim of the modern propaganda of disbelief.
</p>

<p>
Heavy, indeed, is the responsibility courted by representatives
of science when they sin against the holiest ideals of mankind,
especially when they induce the maturing youth, with his susceptibilities
and awakening impulses, to emancipate himself from
the belief of his childhood, and to tear down the fortifications of
innocence! If the teacher is high-minded, this cannot mitigate
the perniciousness of his teaching, but only increase it, neither
can the fact that his personal morals are without a flaw vindicate
him. If a man by strewing poison does no harm to himself,
this does not give him the right to injure others. If science
<pb n='326'/><anchor id='Pg326'/>
demands the privilege of assuming the mental education of
our people, then science assumes also the duty of administering
these interests conscientiously, and the gravest responsibility
will rest upon him in whose hand science spreads ruin.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head><q>Knowledge does no Harm</q>?</head>

<p>
<q>The increase and spread of knowledge</q> (this is a further
objection) <q>can never harm society, only benefit its interests</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Von Amira</hi>). Hence, do not get alarmed: nothing is to be
feared from science. The apostles of the enlightened eighteenth
century tried to quiet their age with similar assertions. <q>It is
not true,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Lessing</hi>, <q>that speculations about God and
divine things have ever done harm to society; not the speculations
did it&mdash;but the folly and tyranny to forbid them.</q>
</p>

<p>
If this were amended to read <emph>true</emph> knowledge can never do
harm, then the mind might be set at rest, although even then
it might become dangerous to teach the truth without discrimination
or caution. Not all are ripe for every truth: truth can
often be misunderstood, lead to false conclusions. Thus, it may
become certain, perhaps, that a much-worshipped relic, a much-visited
shrine, is not genuine: nevertheless in giving such explanation
to simple, pious people one would have to display
caution in order to keep them from doubting even the tenets of
the creed.
</p>

<p>
But there is also false knowledge; can this <q>never do harm
but only benefit?</q> Will all knowledge exert the same influence,
whether the Christian tenets of love and mercy, or <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche's</hi>
moral for the wealthy, whether young people are given to
read Christian books, or those of <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Buechner</hi>, and
<hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>? The story is told of <hi rend='italic'>Voltaire</hi>, that he sent all servants
out of the room when he had friends for guests and philosophical
discussions started at the dining-table, because he did not
wish to have his throat cut the next night. So this free-thinker,
too, did not think that all knowledge is beneficial.
</p>

<p>
But, we are further assured, let science peacefully pursue its
way; if it should err it will correct itself.
</p>

<p>
It is true, sciences of obvious subjects, that have no direct
<pb n='327'/><anchor id='Pg327'/>
relation to moral conduct of life, do, sooner or later, correct
their mistakes; recent physics has corrected the mistakes of
the physics of past ages; historical errors, too, are disappearing
with the times. Quite different is the matter when philosophical-religious
questions are at issue. Pantheism, subjectivism,
<q>scientific</q> rejection of faith, are errors, grave errors,
yet it does not follow that they will fall of themselves into
desuetude; they may prevail for a long time, may return with
the regularity of certain diseases. Their error is not tangible,
and the desires of the heart incline to them by the law of least
resistance. From the earliest ages to this day the same philosophical
errors have returned, in varied form.
</p>

<p>
But let us assume that this would be the case; that these
errors, too, would disappear after some time, disappear for
good. Is it demanded that the errors in the meanwhile ought
to have free play? Shall the surgeon be allowed to perform
risky experiments on the patient, because later on he will realize
that his act was objectionable? Will the father hand to
his son an improper book, consoling himself that truth must
prevail in the end, even though defeated temporarily?
</p>

<p>
These are delusions of the abstract intellectualism of our
times, which sees all salvation and human perfection merely in
learning and knowledge, and forgets that knowledge signifies
education and benefit for mankind only when attached to truth
and moral order. Not knowledge, but knowledge of the truth,
and moral dignity, make for civilization and perfection; knowledge
no longer controlled by truth and ethics becomes the hireling
of the low passions, and fights for their freedom.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head><q>The Vehicle of Truth.</q></head>

<p>
Back of the urgent demands for unrestricted freedom in teaching
stands invariably a thought that operates with palsying
effect upon the minds: to wit, that science is the embodiment
of truth, a genius carrying the unextinguishable beacon of light:
to silence it would be to resist the truth.
</p>

<p>
Our first thought when we began our dissertation of the
Freedom of Science was, that science is not the poetical being so
<pb n='328'/><anchor id='Pg328'/>
often described: it is an individual activity, a product of the
human mind, sharing its defects and weaknesses. For this
reason science is not the infallible bearer of the truth; least of
all in the higher questions of life, where its eyes are dimmed,
and where inclinations of the heart still further obscure its
strength of vision. And this is admitted, even to the point of
despairing of the ability to find the truth on these questions, and
if one is not ready to admit this, the fact is made apparent by a
glance at the countless errors exhibited in the history of human
thinking.
</p>

<p>
Is error to have the same right that truth has? If wholesome
beverage may rightly be offered to anybody, can, with the
same right, poison be given? May one follow his false sense
of truth, calling it science, and teach anything he thinks right?
</p>

<p>
Moreover, is not this science, which, according to its exponents,
need not regard anything but its own method, entirely a <emph>special
kind of science</emph>? Indeed it is, as we have learned to know it.
We have learned to know this free science, with its autonomous
subjectivism, that shapes its changing views according to
personal experience; this feeble but proud scepticism; we
have learned of those ominous imperatives, that banish everything
divine from the horizon of knowledge&mdash;a science with
its torch turned upside down. And its aim&mdash;negation. The
beautiful thought is frequently expressed that science, especially
the science of our universities, is to act as the leader in the
mental life of the nation, <q>a universal Parliament of science,
which would represent the authoritative power so urgently
needed by our discordant and sceptical age, an age that has lost
faith in authority.</q>
</p>

<p>
The idea is beautiful, it is sublime; it coincides with a conception
of the divine Spirit, who has already realized it, though,
it is true, in another manner. The divine Spirit has founded
in the bosom of mankind such a centre of mental life; namely,
the Church. She, and only she, bears all the marks of the universal
teacher of truth. By virtue of divine aid the Church
alone has the prerogative of infallibility, as necessary to the
teacher of the nations; human philosophy is not infallible, least
of all a science that despairs of the highest truth, nay, that often
<pb n='329'/><anchor id='Pg329'/>
deals with it as the cat does with the mouse. A teacher of the
nations must possess unity of doctrine. The Church has this
unity, her view of the world stands before us in perfect concord;
while discord reigns in the philosophy of a free mankind, one
thought opposed to another. The Church is holy, holy in her
moral laws, holy in her service of the truth; she never shirks
truth, not even where truth is painful; the Church never surrenders
the truth to human passions. The Church is Catholic,
general, for the learned and the unlearned; she is apostolic,
with faithful hand she preserves for all generations the spiritual
patrimony of the forefathers. And the unbelieving science of
liberalism, where is its holiness, when its eye cannot bear the
sight of heaven? when it numbers among its admirers all the
unholy elements of humanity? Where is its catholicity, its
reverence for traditions, its historic sense, the indispensable
requirement for the teacher of centuries? The ruins of overthrown
truths, amongst which wanton thought holds its orgies,
bear witness to the unfitness of infidel science to be the teacher
of mankind.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Serious Charges.</head>

<p>
The science of our day must often listen to charges of the
gravest nature. They are uttered not only by servants of the
Church, but in public meetings, legislative bodies, and in
numerous articles by the press: science, we are told, has become
a danger to faith and morals, it has become the teacher
of irreligion, a leader in the war against Christianity. The
force of the accusation is felt and attempts are made to ward it
off. And then we are assured that science is not the enemy of religion,
nor of the precious possessions of society.
</p>

<p>
It is clear, without further proof, that science in itself
cannot be a social danger; hence the charge cannot apply to
science in general, but only to that special brand of science
cultivated in an <emph>anti-Christian</emph> spirit. The assurance from its
champions, that their intentions are the best, may often be a
proof that they do not realize the scope of their doctrines; nevertheless,
it cannot be denied that this science has become, through
its principles, as taught in lectures and in print, the greatest
<pb n='330'/><anchor id='Pg330'/>
danger to the religious-moral possessions of our nations and to
the foundations of public order, hence an unlimited freedom for
the activities of this science means unlimited freedom for a destructive
power that spells ruin to our mental culture.
</p>

<p>
Can the principles of this science be anything but a danger?
Their sharp antagonism to the principle of authority, must it
not undermine the respect for state authority, must it not
strengthen the elements of social disorder? Its contempt of
sacred traditions, must it not become a danger to everything
existing? <q>If all mankind were of one opinion,</q> it teaches,
<q>and but one single man were of a different opinion, then mankind
would have no more right to impose silence on him than
he to silence all of mankind, if he could,</q> must not such an individualism
become the fertile soil of revolutionary ideas?
Its ethics without religion tells every one that his own individuality
is the court of last resort for his moral doings, that
moral laws are subject to change, and must such views not
become a danger to moral order? Finally, the separation of
mankind from God and its eternal destiny, must it not necessarily
lead the whole of life to materialism? and from the
scullery it is not far to the sewer. Through its antagonism
to Christian faith this science becomes the chief factor in
dechristianizing the nations.
</p>

<p>
It is objected that this accusation is not true, because science
addresses itself to <emph>professional circles</emph> only; the people, of
course, cannot digest these things, therefore religion is to be
preserved for the people.
</p>

<p>
Why this distinction? The principles of liberal science of
to-day are either true or they are not true. If not true, why
profess them? If they are true, as is vehemently asserted,
then why should the people be excluded from a true view of
the world? Have the people not an equal right to the truth
in important questions, equal right to light and happiness?
Ah, the consequences of this doctrine of freedom are feared;
it is feared the people's natural logic would take hold of these
principles and draw from them its conclusions. And by that
very fear these principles stand condemned of themselves. The
truth can stand its consequences, as does the Christian view
<pb n='331'/><anchor id='Pg331'/>
of the world; and the more zealously its consequences are pursued,
the more blessed the fruits. It is otherwise with error.
Therefore, if the principles of liberal science cannot stand their
consequences, they must be erroneous. <q>Consider chiefly to be
good that which enhances when communicated to others,</q> is a
wise maxim of the Pythagoreans. Anything spelling damage
and ruin, when communicated to others, is not good, but evil.
</p>

<p>
Nor is it true that science confines itself to professional
circles. Any one who does not lead the isolated existence of
pedantry knows that this is not the case. What the professor
of our day teaches in the lecture room, finds its way into the
minds of his students, and from there into preparatory and
public schools; ideas committed by the scientific writer to paper
and print, go into all the world, and, transformed into popular
speech, become the common property of the millions. The
flood of books, pamphlets, and leaflets attacking and vilifying
the Christian tenets of faith is ever swelling, and day by day
tons of this literature are spread without hindrance over Christian
countries. There is not a single book against the Christian
truth, be its author named <hi rend='italic'>Feuerbach</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Strauss</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Carneri</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>, or otherwise, that does not soon circulate
in popular editions in every country, or at least has to lend its
subject to pamphlets and booklets, which then carry these <q>results
of science</q> to every nook and corner, to the remotest backwoods
village. And the fruits? All those who in these days
profess infidelity and radicalism, they all unanimously profess
adherence to modern free science.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Tell Me with Whom Thou Goest.</head>

<p>
In stately array they come along nowadays, free-thinkers and
freemasons, free-religionists and representatives of the free view
of the world, monists, agitators for <q>free school</q> and socialists,
all impetuously active in the service of anti-Christianity, bent on
reviving and spreading ancient heathendom. All are avowed
disciples of free science, all spread its doctrines, and all work
for the popularizing of their ideas. There they press on, the living
proof that modern science, as far as it is infidel, has become,
<pb n='332'/><anchor id='Pg332'/>
voluntarily or involuntarily, the teacher of radicalism, of paganism,
and the leader in the battle against religion and Christian
morals.
</p>

<p>
And in its train is marching Free-thought in all its varieties.
Its aim at destruction, its dismal designs against religion and
state, have become manifest in its books and conventions; for
instance, the international free-thinker conventions lately held at
Rome and at Prague were plainly of anarchistical sentiment.
In their midst we see men of science, academic
teachers. Under their auspices are arranged <q>scientific lectures</q>
to make known the <q>results of modern science,</q> with
the conviction that this will suffice for the overthrow of religion;
they demand that <q>the instruction in public institutions be
only a scientific one</q>; itinerant orators are sent to speak with
preference on <q>Science and the Church,</q> on the theocratic
view of the world and free science. The doctrines of liberal
science are adopted by freemasonry, its rallying-cry is <q>freedom
from God, freedom of the human reason.</q> And following the
band-wagon of free science, we see a shouting and jeering multitude,
its clenched fists threatening any one who would dare to
attack this fine science, their liberator from the yoke of religion;
they are the thousands of the common people, whose faith
has been torn out of their hearts, and, with faith, also peace
and good morals. We see marching there hundreds from
the ranks of youth, who in the heedless impulse of their inexperience
have cast off belief, and, with belief, frequently all moral
discipline; they, too, look upon science as their liberator. The
morally inferior part of mankind, which declares anything to
be ethical that <q>promotes life</q>; which fights against <q>love-denying
views</q> and against obsolete maxims of morals, it, too,
follows in the tracks of free science. And wherever the issue
is to fight Christian institutions, under the name of marriage-reform,
free-school, or what not, there we are sure to see representatives
of science and of universities, and to hear them hold
forth for free science.
</p>

<p>
Where the purpose is to kindle the fires of revolt against
religious authority, there we are certain to meet in the first
rank the modern teachers of science.
</p>

<pb n='333'/><anchor id='Pg333'/>

<p>
Science and its representatives have an ideal vocation. They
should be the hearth of the spiritual goods of the nations; new
and wholesome forces should at all times emanate from the abodes
of science, and the people should look up with confidence to these
watch-towers of knowledge and truth. What a shocking contrast
to this exalted ideal it is, to hear time and again the believing
people and their leaders raise a complaining and indignant
voice against a science that has become a most dangerous
antagonist to their holiest goods! Is it not painful to see
the devout mother apprehensively cautioning her son, who departs
for the university, not to let his faith be taken from him
by teaching and association? Is it not sad to observe that
it has become the common saying: <q>He has lost his faith at
the university</q>? Is it not regrettable to see that Catholic
universities have become necessary to preserve the ideal goods of
the Christian religion? It is unavoidable that such complaints
are sometimes exaggerated. In their generality they include universities
that have given small reason for them; honourable men
and representatives of sciences who should not be reproached are
being mixed up in these charges. But it is true, nevertheless,
that many have given such occasion. Is it not true also that
many remain silent instead of protesting in the name of true
science? that they feel it incumbent upon themselves to protect
such a procedure, for the sake of the freedom of science?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
For a generation and longer, <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> misused science to make war
upon religion, and went to the extreme in his scientific outrageousness,
not even stopping at forgery. Professor <hi rend='italic'>W. His</hi> had already in 1875
expressed his opinion of <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> in relation to the false drawings of his
embryonic illustrations in the words: <q>Others may respect <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> as
an active and reckless leader: in my judgment he has on account of his
methods forfeited the right to be considered an equal in the circle of
serious investigators.</q> When Dr. <hi rend='italic'>Brass</hi>, a member of the Kepler Bund,
recently disclosed new forgeries of this kind, it should have been made
the occasion for a protest in the interest of science and its freedom
against such methods. Instead of that, however, forty-six professors of
biology and zoölogy published a statement in defence of <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi>, declaring
that while not approving of <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel's</hi> method in some instances, they
condemned in the interest of science and of freedom of teaching most
strongly the war waged against <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel</hi> by <hi rend='italic'>Brass</hi> and the Kepler
Bund. Is the freedom to use methods like <hi rend='italic'>Haeckel's</hi> included in the
freedom of teaching, which they consider must be defended? Can it
surprise any one that this freedom of teaching is viewed with concern?
</p>

<pb n='334'/><anchor id='Pg334'/>

<p>
Much excitement was caused a few years ago by a pamphlet of an
Austrian professor. Another Austrian professor, of high rank in
science, criticized the pamphlet as <q>A reckless and absolute negation
of the foundation of the Christian dogma in the widest sense of the word,
proclaimed as the verdict of science and of common sense. It is replete
with blasphemous jokes, such as may usually be heard only in the most
vulgar places.</q>
</p>

<p>
A cry of indignation was raised by the Catholic people of the Tyrol
against this base insult to their creed; it was shown that the author
of this pamphlet had misused his lectures on Catholic Canon Law,
to speak to his Catholic students disdainfully of the Divinity of Christ,
of the Sacraments, of the Church, and the prime foundations of
Christianity. Upon indictment by the public prosecutor, the pamphlet
was condemned in Court as a libel upon the Christian religion.
</p>

<p>
It was expected that the representatives of science, in defence of
the threatened honour of science, would repudiate all community of
interest with a production that was merely the expression of an
anti-Christian propaganda. That expectation was not fulfilled; on the
contrary, those in authority at the Austrian universities, and numerous
professors of other countries, joined in a protest against the violation
of the rights of a professor, against the attacks on freedom of science.
They demanded full immunity for the author of the libel. Even the
state department of Religion and Education expressed the opinion that
the accused <q>had only availed himself of the right of free research.</q>
Is this the freedom in teaching that is to be protected by the state?
And yet there are those who indignantly deny that there is danger
for religion in this freedom!
</p>

</quote>

<p>
He who really has at heart the honour of science and of
the universities, and is inspired by their ideals, should bear in
mind that to realize these ideals the first thing necessary is
public confidence: not the confidence of a revolutionizing
minority,&mdash;a scrutiny of those elements that give them their
plaudits ought to arouse reflection,&mdash;but the confidence of
earnest, conservative circles of the uncorrupted people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In academic circles the increasing lack of respect for the university
and its teachers is complained of. Professor <hi rend='italic'>Von Amira</hi> writes: <q>Thirty
years ago the academic teacher was reverenced by the highest society;
his association was sought; he had no need of any other title than
the one that told what he was. To-day we see a different picture,
particularly as to the title 'professor.' To-day they smile at it. Nowadays,
if a professor desires to impress, he must bear a title designating
something else than what he really is. A literature has grown up that
deals with the decline of the universities. The fact of a decline is taken
for granted, only its causes and remedies are discussed. And this is
not all. Invectives are bestowed upon the institutions, upon the teachers
as a body, upon the individual teacher. And there is no one to take up
<pb n='335'/><anchor id='Pg335'/>
the cudgels in our defence!</q> A fact suggesting earnest self-examination,
and the resolution not to forfeit still more this respect. It is not
sufficient to repudiate with indignation the complaints. Nor will it do
to pretend a respect for religion and Christianity, and a desire to see
both preserved, that are not really felt. What is needed is the admission
that the road taken is the wrong one.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Responsibility before History.</head>

<p>
The distressing fact is realized that the worm of immorality
is devouring in our day the marrow of the most civilized
nations. It is also known that its wretched victims are in no
class so numerous as in the class of college men. Earnest-minded
men and women are raising a warning cry, and are
forming societies to stem the ruin of the nations. The alarm
bell is ringing through the lands.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Remarkable words on this subject are those written not long ago
by <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>: <q>It looks as if all the demons had been let loose at this
moment to devastate the basis of the people's life. Those who know
Germany through reading only, through its comic weeklies, its plays,
its novels, the windows of its bookshops, the lectures delivered and
attended by male and female, must arrive at the opinion that the paramount
question to the German people just now is whether the restrictions
put on the free play of the sexual impulse by custom and
law are evil and should be abolished?</q> <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> puts the responsibility
for it upon the sophistry on the sexual instinct and the present naturalism
in the view of the world: <q>The prevailing naturalism in the view
of world and life is leading to astonishing aberrations of judgment, and
this is true also of men otherwise discerning. If man is nothing else but
a system of natural instincts, similar in this to the rest of living beings,
then, indeed, no one can tell what other purpose life could have than the
gratification of all instincts.... Reformation of ideas&mdash;this is the cry
heard in all streets; cast off a Christianity hostile to life, that is killing
in embryo thousands of possibilities for happiness. True, even in
past ages young people were not spared temptation. But the barriers
were stronger; traditional, moral, religious sentiment, and sensible
views. Our time has pulled down these barriers; young people everywhere
are advised by all the leading lights of the day: old morals and
religion are dead, slain by modern science; the old commandments
are the obsolete fetters of superstition. We know now their origin;
they are but auto-suggestions of common consciousness which mistakes
them for voices from another world, that has been deposed long since
by the scientific thought of to-day.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
These are words of indignation of a well-meaning friend
of mankind. Do they not rebound upon the speaker himself
<pb n='336'/><anchor id='Pg336'/>
to become terrible self-accusations for him and others, who,
while perhaps of similar well-meaning sentiment, are actually
working for the annihilation of the moral-religious sentiment,
as <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> himself has done by his books?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>The old religion is dead, slain by science,</q> is proclaimed in innumerable
passages of his books; the idea of another world has long
been disposed of by the scientific reasoning of the present time, <q>hence
a philosophy,</q> he tells us, <q>which insists upon the thesis that certain
natural processes make it necessary to assume a metaphysical principle,
or a supernatural agency, will always have science for an
irreconcilable opponent.</q> <q>It will be difficult for a future age
to understand,</q> he writes elsewhere, <q>how our times so complacently
could cling to a system of religious instruction originated many
centuries ago under entirely different conditions of intellectual life,
and which in many points forms the decided opposite to facts and
notions which, outside of the school, are taken by our times for
granted.</q> In respect to morals, too, one can do without a supernatural
law. <q>According to the view presented here, ethics as a science does
not depend on belief.... Moral laws are the natural laws of the
human-historical life of time and place.... Nor does it seem advisable
in pedagogical-practical respect to make the force or the significance of
ethical commands dependent on a matter so uncertain as the belief in
a future life.</q> We might cite many similar expressions from his
writings.
</p>

<p>
It is significant that they have to condemn their own science in view
of its sad consequences.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> loudly demands <emph>restriction for the freedom of
art</emph>, for the industry of lewdness, for the literature of perversity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
He says: <q>The English people, admired by us because of their liberal
principles and free institutions, are less afraid to show by the sternest
means the door to salacious minds ... the feeling of responsibility for
preserving the roots of the strength of the people's life is in England
far more wide awake than with us, who still feel in our bones the
fear of censure and the policeman's club.... But what are the things
committed by our nasty trades and the publications in their service
other than so many assaults upon our liberty? Are they not primarily
an assault upon the inner freedom of adolescent youth who are made
slaves of their lowest instincts by the industries of these merchants?
Therefore admonish the hangman not to be swerved by the plea of
freedom.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
No one will deny approval to these words. But do they not,
again, become a severe condemnation of the reckless freedom
<pb n='337'/><anchor id='Pg337'/>
in teaching, that claims the right to assault without hindrance
the truths which are the foundation of our nation?
If art must not become a danger, why may science? If the
artist is asked to take into consideration the innocence and
weal of young people, if he is cautioned not to follow solely
<q>his sense for beauty,</q> why should the teacher be allowed to
follow his <q>sense for truth</q> without regard for anything else?
If no statute of limitation and restriction exist for science,
neither prescribed nor prohibited ideas for the academic teacher,
why should there be any prohibited <q>æsthetic principles</q>
for the artist? Manifestly, because here the absurdity of
this freedom is more clearly perceptible, because it leads to
shamelessness. At this juncture, therefore, they are constrained
to concede the untenability and the senselessness of
the unlimited human freedom, that is defended with so much
volubility.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> points to an age in which, similarly to our times, progressive
men arose and, in the name of science, discarded religion and
morals; they called themselves men of science, sages, <q>sophists.</q> <q>It
is remarkable that the very same occurrence was observed more than
2,000 years ago, when <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> experienced it in his time with the young
people of Athens, who became fascinated by similar sophistical speech.</q>
</p>

<p>
The noble Sage of Greece had caustic words for <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi>, the
champion of sophistry, and his brethren in spirit: <q>If cobblers and
tailors were to put in worse condition the shoes and clothes they
receive for improving, this would soon be known and they would starve;
not so <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi>, who is corrupting quietly the whole of Hellas, and
who has dismissed his disciples in a worse state than he received them,
and this for more than forty years.... Not <hi rend='italic'>Protagoras</hi> alone, but
many others did this before and after him. Did they knowingly deceive
and poison the youth or did they not realize what they were doing?
Are we to assume that these men, praised by many for their sagacity,
have done so in ignorance? No, they were not blind to their acts, but
blind were the young people who paid them for instruction, blind were
their parents who confided them to these sophists, blindest were the communities
that admitted them instead of turning them away.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What a responsibility to co-operate in the intellectual corruption
of entire generations! And the corruption by dechristianizing
is increasing in all circles, owing to the misuse
of science. That the condition is not even worse is not the
merit of this science, nor evidence of the harmlessness of its
<pb n='338'/><anchor id='Pg338'/>
freedom; it is the merit of the after effect of a Christian past,
which continues to influence, consciously or unconsciously, the
thought and feeling even of those circles that seem to be long
since estranged from Christianity.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Concerning the decline of morality in our age <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> observes:
<q><hi rend='italic'>Foerster</hi> rightly emphasizes the fact that the old Church rendered
an imperishable service in moralizing and spiritualizing our life, by
urging first of all the discipline of the will, and by raising heroes of
self-denial in the persons of her Saints. That we still draw from this
patrimony I, too, do not doubt. <emph>That we waste it carelessly
is indeed the great danger.</emph></q>
</p>

<milestone unit='tb' rend='rule:50%'/>

<p>
<q>It was a wonderfully balmy evening in the fall of 1905,</q> relates
Rev. <hi rend='italic'>L. Ballet</hi>, missionary in Japan, <q>and the sun had just set behind
Mount Fiji. Unexpectedly a young Japanese appeared in front of me,
desiring to talk to me. I noticed that he was a young student. I
bade him enter, and we saluted each other with a low bow, as persons
meeting for the first time. I asked him to take a seat opposite to me,
and took advantage of the first moments of silence to take a good look
at him. But imagine my astonishment when his first question was,
<q>Do you believe life is worth living?</q> asked in an earnest but calm
manner. I confess this question from lips so young alarmed me and
went to my heart like a thrust. <q>Why, certainly,</q> was my reply,
<q>life is worth living, and living good. How do you come to ask a
question that sounds so strange from the lips of a young man? You
certainly do not desire to follow the example of your fellow-countryman
<hi rend='italic'>Fijimura Misao</hi>, who jumped into the abyss from Mount Kegon?</q>&mdash;<q>No,
sir, at least not yet. I confess, however, that I feel my hesitation
to be cowardice, for I have made this resolution for some time. In my
opinion man is purely a thing of blind accident, a wretched, ephemeral
fly without importance, without value. Why then prolong a life in
which a little pleasure is added to so much sorrow, so much disappointment;
a life that at any rate finally melts away into nothing?
I am more and more convinced that this is the truth.</q>&mdash;<q>And what
brought you to such views?</q>&mdash;<q>Well, science, philosophy, the books
which I have read for pastime or study. If it were only the opinion
of our few Japanese scientists one might hesitate; but the science,
the philosophy, of Europe, translated and expounded by our writers,
teach the same thing. God, soul, future life, all is idle delusion.
Nothing is eternal but only matter. After twenty, thirty, sixty years,
man dies, and there remains nothing of him but his body, which will
decay in order to pass into other beings, matter like he was. This
is what science teaches us; a hard doctrine, I confess; but what is
there to be said against it, considering the positive results of scientific
research?</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Great responsibility is borne by a science that despoils mankind
of its best, of all that gives it comfort and support in
<pb n='339'/><anchor id='Pg339'/>
life! In faraway Japan there is not the spiritual power of
Christianity to counteract the misuse of science; the poison
does its work and there is no antidote.
</p>

<p>
That the Christian nations <q>carelessly waste their patrimony,
that, indeed, is the great danger.</q>
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='340'/><anchor id='Pg340'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Freedom Of Teaching And The State.</head>

<p>
Close bonds of mutual dependence and solidarity interlink
all created beings, especially men. Insufficient in himself,
both physically and mentally, man finds in uniting with others
everything he needs; thus do individuals and families join forces,
generations join hands; what the fathers have earned is inherited
and increased by new generations. Human life is essentially
social life and co-operation&mdash;in the indefinite form social
life within the great human society, in the definite form social
life within the two great bodies, Church and state. Within both
bodies human benefits are to be attained and protected against
danger by common exertion&mdash;within the Church the spiritual
benefits of eternal character, within the state the temporal
benefits.
</p>

<p>
Hence both bodies, or societies, will have to take a position in
relation to science and its doctrine. Indeed, in civilized nations
there is hardly a public activity of mightier influence upon life
than science. The contemplation of this position shall now be
our task.
</p>

<p>
Science, as we have above set forth, addresses itself to
mankind&mdash;a fallible science addressing itself to men easily
deceived; therefore, an unrestricted freedom in teaching is
ethically inadmissible. Hence it follows, as a matter of
course, that the authorities of state and Church, who must
guard the common benefits, have the duty of keeping the freedom
in scientific teaching within its proper bounds, so far
as this lies in their power. Hitherto we have left these social
authorities out of consideration; the position taken was the
general ethical one.
</p>

<p>
The case might be supposed that the Church had provided
few restrictions of this kind, and the state none at all; nevertheless,
<pb n='341'/><anchor id='Pg341'/>
an absolute freedom in teaching would still present a
condition dangerous to the community at large, contrary
to the demands of morality; we should then have an unrestricted
freedom in teaching, permitted by law, but ethically
inadmissible.
</p>

<p>
The distinction is important. Quite often freedom in teaching
is spoken of as permitted by the state, as if it was identical
with ethical permission. If freedom in teaching is permitted by
the state, this evidently means only that the state permits teaching
without interference on its part; it says, I do not stand in
the way, I let things proceed. But this does not mean that it is
right and proper. The burden of personal responsibility rests
upon him who avails himself of a freedom which, though not
hindered by the state, is in conflict with what is right. The
state tolerates many things&mdash;it does not interfere against
unkindness, nor against extravagance, nor deceit; nevertheless
everybody is morally responsible for such doings.
</p>

<p>
If, then, we take up the question, what position social authority
should take toward scientific teaching, whether it be in the
higher schools, or outside of them, we are considering chiefly
the state. It is the state that enters most into consideration
when freedom in teaching nowadays is discussed; the state
may interfere most effectively in the management of schools and
universities, for these are state institutions in most countries.
</p>

<div>
<head>Universities as State Institutions.</head>

<p>
They were not always state institutions. The universities
of the Middle Ages were autonomous corporations, which constituted
themselves, made their own statutes, had their own courts,
but enjoyed at the same time legal rights. Conditions gradually
changed after the Reformation. The power of princes began
more and more to interfere in the management of the universities,
until in the seventeenth century, and still more in the
eighteenth, the universities became state institutions, subject to
the reigning sovereign, the professors his salaried officials, and
text-books, subject and form of instruction were prescribed by
the minute, paternal directions of the sovereign, and with the
<pb n='342'/><anchor id='Pg342'/>
mania for regulating that was a feature of the eighteenth century.
The nineteenth century brought more liberty; it was
demanded by the enlarged scope of universities, which no longer
were only the training schools for the learned professions, but
became the home of research, needing freedom of movement.
</p>

<p>
Nevertheless, universities are in many countries still state institutions.
They are founded by the state, are given organization
and laws by the state; the teachers are appointed and
given their commissions by the state. They are state officials,
though less under government supervision than other state officials.
At the same time these universities are possessed of a
certain measure of autonomy, a remainder of olden times. They
elect their academic authorities, which have some autonomy
and disciplinary jurisdiction. Likewise the separate faculties
have their powers; they confer degrees, administer their benefices,
and exert considerable influence in filling vacant chairs.
</p>

<p>
The state then considers it its duty to grant freedom in
teaching. <q>Science and its teaching are free,</q> says the law in
some countries. No doubt a loosely drawn sentence; at any
rate, it means that science should be granted the <emph>proper</emph> freedom.
And this freedom it must have. We have become more
sensitive of unjustified paternal government than were the
people of the eighteenth century.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Object of the State.</head>

<p>
What kind of a freedom in teaching, then, should be granted
by the state? Unlimited freedom? This is, at any rate, not
a necessary conclusion. The state must also grant freedom to
the father for the education of his children, to the landowner
for the culture of his fields, to the artist in the production
of his works; but that freedom would not be understood to be
an unlimited one, having no regard to the interests of society,
but merely as the exclusion of unwarranted interference.
Hence if the state, for reasons of the commonwealth, were to
restrict freedom of teaching, the restraint could not be considered
unjust. The purpose of the state must not suffer injury;
to attain this purpose the state has the right to demand,
<pb n='343'/><anchor id='Pg343'/>
and must demand, all that is necessary to the purpose in view,
even though it entails a restriction of somebody's freedom.
Now for a definition of this purpose of the state.
</p>

<p>
Like any other society, the state seeks to attain a definite
object, so much the more because the state is necessary to
man, who otherwise would have to forego the things most
needed in life; and but for the public co-operation of the many
these could be attained not at all, or at least not sufficiently.
To provide these things is the object of the state, viz., the
public welfare of the citizens; it is to bring about public
conditions which will enable the citizens to attain their temporal
welfare. To this end the state must protect the rights
of its subjects, and must protect and promote the public goods
of economic life, but especially the spiritual benefits of morals
and religion. The state, through its legislative, judicial, and
executive functions, is to <emph>direct</emph> effectively the community to
this end; therefore it is incumbent upon the state to care for
the preservation and promotion of both material and spiritual
benefits, for the protection of private rights, and for the conditions
necessary to its own existence, even against the arbitrary
will of its subjects.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Protection for the Spiritual Foundations of Life.</head>

<p>
From this the conclusion naturally follows, that the state
must not grant freedom to propound in public, by speech or
writing, theories that will <emph>endanger the religious and moral
goods of its citizens and the foundation of the state</emph>.
</p>

<p>
We claim that the state neglects a solemn duty if it permits
without hindrance&mdash;we will not say, the ridicule and disparagement
of religion and morals: the less so, as freedom to ridicule
and to slander has nothing to do with freedom in teaching&mdash;but
the public promulgation of theories which are either
irreligious, or against morals, or against the state. Even though
they be done in scientific form, injuries to the common weal remain
injuries, and they do not change into something else by
being committed in scientific form. The state must seek to
prevent such injuries by strictly enforced penalties and by the
<pb n='344'/><anchor id='Pg344'/>
selection of conscientious teachers. The enforcement of the
principle may not be possible under circumstances, legislatures
may lack insight or good will, or the complexion of the state
may not admit of it for the time being, or permanently. Then
we would simply see a regrettable condition, a government incapable
of ridding itself of the morbid matter which is poisoning
its marrow. But if there is good will and energy, one thing
may always be done to check injurious influences, and that is
the awakening and employment of forces of opposition.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The University of Halle is said to have been the first one to enjoy
modern freedom in teaching. What, at that time, however, was meant
by freedom in teaching, is shown by the words of <hi rend='italic'>Chr. Thomasius</hi> in
1694: <q>Thank God that He has prompted His Anointed (the prince)
not to introduce here the yoke under which many are now and then languishing,
but gracefully to grant our teachers the freedom of doctrines
<emph>that are not against God and the state</emph>.</q> One hundred and fifty
years later Minister <hi rend='italic'>Eichhorn</hi> advised the University of Koenigsberg
that in natural sciences neither the individual freedom in teaching nor
of research are limited, that the case is different, however, with philosophy
as applied to life, with history, theology, and the science of laws.
<q>The first requisite there,</q> he said, <q>is a proper bent of mind, which,
however, can find its basis and its lasting support only in religion. With
the proper bent of mind there will be no desire to teach doctrines which
attack the roots of the very life of one's own country.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Now, what considerations make it plain that the duty of the
state is as stated? Two: consideration for its subjects, and
consideration for the state itself. The state must protect the
highest <emph>possessions of its citizens</emph>. For that reason men are
by nature itself prompted to found states, so as to protect better
their common goods, by the strong hand of an authority, against
foes from within and without, and to enable them to bequeath
those goods inviolate to their sons and grandsons. Hence they
must demand of state-power not to tolerate conditions which
would greatly jeopardize those goods, and certainly not to allow
attacks thereon by its own educational organs. The highest
spiritual benefits of civilization, and at the same time the
necessary foundations of a well-ordered life, are, first of all,
morality and religion; not morality alone, but also religion,
do not forget this. Man's first duty is the duty of worshipping
God, of recognizing and worshipping his Creator, the ultimate
<pb n='345'/><anchor id='Pg345'/>
end of all things. A profound truth was stated by <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>,
when, coupling the duties to God with those to parents,
he said that those merit punishment who question the duty of
worshipping the gods and of loving one's parents. Hence the
first thing to be preserved to the nations is religion; it is in
many ways their most precious possession, too. Not only do all
nations possess religion, not excepting the most uncivilized;
but there is no power that influences life and stirs the heart
more than religion. Consider the religious wars of history;
while they were surely deplorable, they demonstrate what religion
is to man. Even in individuals who to all appearance are irreligious,
religion never fully dies out; it appears there in false
forms, or is their great puzzle, maybe the incubus of their lives,
giving them no rest. Only in conjunction with firm religious
principle can morality stand fast. Nowadays they work for
ethics without religion, for education and school without God.
Theoreticians in their four walls, removed from all real life,
are busily working out systems of this sort. This new ethics
has not yet stood the test of life, or, if it did, it has succeeded
in gaining for its adherents only those who are at odds with religion
and morals. These theories must first be otherwise attested
before they may replace the old, well-tried religious
foundations.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The noted and justly esteemed pedagogue, <hi rend='italic'>Fr. W. Foerster</hi>, writes:
<q>On the part of free-thinkers vigorous complaint has been made that
my book so decidedly confesses the unparalleled pedagogic strength of
the Christian religion. The author therefore repeats emphatically that
this confession has not grown out of an arbitrary metaphysical mood, but
directly out of his moral-pedagogic studies. For over ten years of a
long period of instructing the youth in ethics, he has been engaged exclusively
in studying psychologically the problem of character-forming,
and the result of his studies is his conviction that all attempts at educating
youth without religion are absolutely futile. And, in the judgment
of the author, the only reason why the notion that religion is
superfluous in education is prevalent in such large circles of modern
pedagogues, is, that they have no extensive practical experience in
character-training, nor made thorough and concentrated studies.</q> <q>The
fact is, that all education in which religion to all outward appearance is
dispensed with, is still deeply influenced by the after-effect of religious
sanction and religious earnestness. What education without religion
really means will become more clearly known in the coming generation.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='346'/><anchor id='Pg346'/>

<p>
The state is zealous in protecting the property of its citizens,
to which end a powerful police apparatus is constantly
at work. If the state deems it its duty to interfere in this
matter, must it not consider it a still higher duty to protect
religion and morals, for the very reason that they are the property
of its citizens, and even their most precious? <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Pro aris et
focis</foreign>, for home and altar, was what was fought for by the old
Romans. Is it possible that a pagan government was more
sterling and high-minded than the Christian state of the
present? If it is to be the bearer of civilization, it ought to
consider that man liveth not by bread alone. The only true
mental civilization is the one which does not hamper but helps
man in attaining his eternal goal.
</p>

<p>
Modern state power is being urged from all sides to take
measures against the corruption of morals by the novel
and the shop window, and not to look on apathetically when the
consuming fire is spreading all about, in the name of art.
Are the dangers to the spiritual health of society any less
if reformers, in the name of science, shake at the foundations
of matrimony, advocate polygamy, teach atheism? Because
a so-called reformer has lost the fundamental truths
of our moral-religious order, must all the rest submit to an
attack upon the sacred possessions of themselves and their
descendants?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
That the rights of the teacher are not unrestricted was set forth by an
American paper (<q>Science,</q> No. 321) in its comment upon the removal
of certain professors: <q>There are barriers set to them on the one hand
by the rights of the students, and by the rights of the college where
he teaches, on the other. The college must preserve its reputation and
its good name, the student must be protected against palpable errors
and waste of time.... If a professor of sociology should attack
the institution of matrimony, and propound the gospel of polygamy
and of free love, then neither the right to teach his views nor his
honesty of purpose would save him from dismissal. This is of course
a very extreme case, not likely to happen.</q>
</p>

<p>
Is it so very extreme? Certainly not in regard to teaching by books.
Listen: <q>From the foregoing it is self-evident that polygyny based
upon the rivalry of men for women (analogous to the animal kingdom)
presents the natural sexual practice of mankind. Whether there is to be
preferred a simultaneous or a successive polygyny, or a combination of
both, would depend on varying conditions. The ethical type of the sexual
<pb n='347'/><anchor id='Pg347'/>
condition, viz., in general the desirable biological type, is the one
that would best suit a polygyny based upon a selection of man.</q> It is
taught further: <q>The monogamic principle of marriage in general is
only conditionally favorable to civilization, whereas it is destructive of
it constitutionally, hence in need of reform.</q> <q>Our contemporaneous
sexual reform wave has not yet assumed the position of this knowledge;
on the contrary, notwithstanding its revolutionary aspect in some particulars,
it is still under the ban of the traditional ideal of marriage</q>;
continence before marriage is an <q>absurd</q> proposition!
</p>

<p>
This new system of morals, fit for the barnyard, but for women the
lowest degradation, is now to become the ideal of men, nay, even of
women: <q>True motherly pride, true womanly dignity, are incompatible
with the exclusiveness of the monogamic property principle. If our
movement for sexual reform is to elevate us instead of plunging us into
the mire, then this view must become part and parcel of our women.</q>
<q>The picture of the motherly woman, of the woman with the pride of
sexual modesty, instead of with the exciting desire of possession ... this
picture must become the ideal of men, and sink down to the bottom
of their soul and into the fibres of their nervous system; it must animate
their fancy and awaken their sensual passions.</q><note place='foot'>Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Chr. von Ehrenfels</hi>, Sexualethik. Similar passages might
be quoted from numerous other books by college-professors.</note> We stand right
in the midst of the world of beasts!
</p>

<p>
This perilous moral teaching is allowed also in public lectures.
On November 14, 1908, the <q>Allgemeine Rundschau</q> wrote: <q>Imagine
a spacious concert-hall, brightly illuminated, every one of the many
seats occupied, the boxes filled to the last place, the aisles crowded, by
a most variegated audience: men and women, young maidens, youths
with downy beard; gentlemen of high rank with their ladies, faces
upon which are written a life of vast experience side by side with childish
faces whose innocence is betrayed by their looks, and on the platform
a university professor and physician, holding forth about the most intimate
relations of sexual life: the unfitness of celibacy, the Catholic
morals of matrimony, prostitution and prostitutes, the causes of adultery,
<q>sterile marriage,</q> onanism, and many kinds of perversities. The
man is, moreover, speaking in a fashion that makes one forget the admonishments
of conscience.</q>
</p>

<p>
The city council of Lausanne, in its meeting of February 10, 1907,
prohibited <hi rend='italic'>Forel's</hi> lecture as an attack upon decency and public
morals, making reference in its resolution to <hi rend='italic'>Forel's</hi> ideas as laid down
in his book. In protest, <hi rend='italic'>Forel</hi> made a public statement, saying among
other things: <q>If the council desires to be logical it would have to
prohibit also the sale of my book.</q> We have no objection to make to
his conclusion.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We stated that religion is man's first duty. This applies not
only to the individual, but also&mdash;and this is forgotten too
often&mdash;to the state. Man, by his nature, and hence in all
<pb n='348'/><anchor id='Pg348'/>
forms of his life, including his citizenship, is obliged to have
religion. He remains in all conditions the creature which is
dependent upon God. And does not the state, too, owe special
duties of gratitude to God? It owes its origin to God: the impulse
to found states has been put into the human nature by
its Creator; the state owes to God the foundation of its authority:
in a thousand difficulties the state is thrown upon His help.
Therefore a public divine service is found with all peoples.
Does the state comply with this duty by silently supporting
a public atheism when it might do otherwise? by even becoming
its patron, when, posing as science, it ascends to the lecturing
desk to teach adolescing youth?
</p>

<p>
Of course, free-thought is of a different opinion, especially
the one of to-day. Its principle is: the state need not trouble
itself about God and Religion, that is the private matter of each
individual. In the eyes of free-thought the state is an imaginary
being, hovering over the heads of its citizens; though they
may be religious, the state itself should have no Religion. What
absurdity! It is nothing short of nonsense to demand of the
members of a state, the overwhelming majority of whom hold
Religion to be true and necessary, that as a political community
they are to act as if their Religion were false and worthless,
as if to deny and to destroy it were quite proper. What
else is the state but an organized aggregation of its citizens?
To make of religious citizens, a state without Religion is just
as absurd as a Catholic state composed wholly and entirely of
Protestant citizens. This leads us to a further consideration.
The state must protect its own foundations. Just as it must
defend its existence against enemies from without, it must
protect itself against those enemies from within, who, whether
realizing the consequences or not, are by their actions actually
shaking its foundations. These foundations consist of proper
views on social and political principles, on morals and Religion.
If the state does not intend to abolish itself, it must not permit
doctrines to be disseminated which imperil these foundations
and, consequently, the peaceful continuance of the state.
In fact, no state power in its senses would permit a teacher, who
directly attacks the validity of the state order, to continue; it
<pb n='349'/><anchor id='Pg349'/>
would retire every professor of law who would dare to teach
that regicide is permissible, or who would with the oratory of a
Tolstoy preach the unnaturalness of a state possessing coercive
power.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As a rule, open advocates of <emph>Socialism</emph> are kept out of college-chairs.
And rightly so. So long as the adherents of Socialism see in the state
but the product of the egotism of the ruling classes, and an institute
for subjugating the masses, and in the obtainment of political power
the means of doing away with this state of affairs, so long will it
be impossible for the state to trust the education of the future
citizen to a Socialist, nor can the latter, as an honest man, accept
a position of trust from the state, much less bind himself by the
oath of office to co-operate in the work of the state. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>C. Bornhak</hi>
makes the following comment: <q>The decisive point is not freedom
in teaching, but the circumstance that the Socialist professor takes
advantage of the respect connected with a state office, or of his position
at a state institution, to undermine the state. A state that would stand
for this would deserve nothing better than its abolition.</q>
</p>

<p>
And <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi> similarly writes: <q>A state that would allow in the
lecture rooms of its colleges Socialistic views to be taught as the results
of science ... such a state will be looked for in vain.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Hence it is certain the state cannot grant a freedom in
teaching that would jeopardize the foundation of its existence.
It must consequently recognize no freedom which, in lectures
and publications, will seriously injure public morality and religion.
Morality and religion are, first of all, the indispensable
conditions for the continuance of the state.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> says the first duty of the state is to care for religion.
<hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> proposes heavy penalty for those who deny the existence of
the gods; a well-ordered state, he claims, must care first of all for
the fostering of religion. <hi rend='italic'>Plutarch</hi> calls religion the bond of every
society and the foundation of the law. <hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi> declares that there can
be neither loyalty nor justice without regard for God. <hi rend='italic'>Valerius Maximus</hi>
could say of Rome: <q>It has ever been the principle of our city to
give preference to religion before any other matter, even before the
highest and most glorious benefits.</q> <hi rend='italic'>Washington</hi>, in his speech to
Congress in 1789, declared religion and morality to be the most indispensable
support of the commonweal. He stated that it would be
in vain for one, who tries to wreck these two fundamental pillars of
the social structure, to boast of his patriotism.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Without religion there can be no firm resistance by conscience
against man's lower nature, no social virtues and sacrifices,
there can only be egotism, the foe of all social order. No
<pb n='350'/><anchor id='Pg350'/>
secure state-life can be built upon the principles that formed
the basis of the French Revolution. So we see, generally and
instinctively, the endeavour to prevent as much as possible anti-religious
doctrines from being expounded directly to the broad
masses of the people. This of itself is tantamount to the
acknowledgment of their danger to the state. Yet, millions have
tasted the fruit of an atheistic science, and the poison shows its
effect; they have shaken off the yoke of religion; in its place
dissatisfaction and bitterness are filling their breast, and fists
are clenched against the existing order.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>Bebel</hi> said in a speech in the German Reichstag, on September 16,
1878: <q>Gentlemen, you attack our views in respect to religion, because
they are atheistic and materialistic. I acknowledge them to be so....
I firmly believe Socialism will ultimately lead to atheism. But these
atheistic doctrines, that now are causing so much pain and trouble for
you, by whom were they scientifically and philosophically demonstrated?
Was it by Socialists? Men like <hi rend='italic'>Edgar</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Bruno</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bauer</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Feuerbach</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>David Strauss</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ernst Renan</hi>, were they Socialists? They were men of
science.... What is allowed to the one&mdash;why should it be forbidden
to the other?</q>
</p>

<p>
The notorious anarchist <hi rend='italic'>Vaillant</hi> said: <q>I have demonstrated to the
physicians at Hotel-Dieu that my deed is the inexorable consequence of
my philosophy, and of the philosophy of <hi rend='italic'>Buechner</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, and <hi rend='italic'>Herbert
Spencer</hi>.</q>
</p>

<p>
The youthful criminal <hi rend='italic'>Emil Herny</hi> read at his trial a memorandum
wherein he said among other things: <q>I am an anarchist since 1891.
Up to this time I was wont to esteem and even to idolize my country,
the family, the state, and property.... Socialism is not able to
change the present order. It upholds the principle of authority which,
all affirmations of so-called free-thinkers notwithstanding, is an obsolete
remnant of the belief in a higher power. I however was a materialist,
atheist. My scientific researches taught me gradually the work of
natural forces. I conceived that science had done away with the
hypothesis of <q>God,</q> which it needs no longer, hence that also the
religious-authoritative doctrine of morals, built upon it, as upon a false
foundation, had to disappear.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
What political wisdom would it be to honor as science any
doctrine that becomes a social danger the moment it is taken
seriously; what logic to denounce those as dangerous who
are putting into practice a science that is hailed as the bearer
of civilization!
</p>

<p>
One may object: How is the state to determine whether
scientific doctrines are warranted or not warranted? The state
<pb n='351'/><anchor id='Pg351'/>
has the conviction that in its political offices it has no organs
for the cognition of scientific truth, for this reason it leaves
science to self-regulation. Only the scientist, it is said, is able
to revise the scientist.
</p>

<p>
Nothing but scholarly conceit can engender such ideas. Then
any one would have the right to pin upon himself the badge of
the scientist and become thereby completely immune. Thus,
the bearers of practical political wisdom are declared incompetent
to recognize the chief foundation of their state-structure;
to realize, what daily experience and the experience of centuries
teaches, that disbelief in God, even if sailing under false colors,
undermines authority, that communism and upheaval of moral
conceptions are tantamount to social danger. They are directed
to depend for their information in such matters upon the latest
ideas of impractical scientists. The fact is, the matters at
issue have, with hardly an exception, long been decided. And
where the Christian faith is concerned, the Church and the
Christian centuries tell us clearly enough, what has hitherto
been understood by Christianity. If the objection here advanced
were true, then the state would not have a right to
decide in the matter of exhibiting immoral pictures in show
windows, without having argued the matter previously with representatives
of art. The state would not be allowed to pronounce
a death sentence because some scientists denounce capital punishment:
the state would have to expunge <q>guilt,</q> <q>expiation,</q>
and <q>liberty</q> from its penal code, because many recent scientists,
by rejecting the freedom of choice, have removed the dividing
line between crime and insanity, between punishment and
correction.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Protection for Christianity.</head>

<p>
Hitherto we have, in respect to religion, considered chiefly
the rational truths, which are the foundations of every religion
and also common to non-Christian creeds; the existence of a
supermundane God and of a life after death are the most important
of them. The revealed Christian religion contains,
beside these truths, some others, which supplement them and surround
them like a living garland, viz., original sin, redemption,
<pb n='352'/><anchor id='Pg352'/>
resurrection, the divinity of Christ, grace and the Sacraments,
the existence of a Church with its God-given rights, indissolubility
of matrimony, etc. Should state-power protect the Christian
and Catholic religion by warding off attacks against it,
though such attacks are made in scientific form? This, too, in
a state in which perhaps other confessions are enjoying the freedom
of worship?
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It would seem superfluous to propose this question specifically. If,
according to the gist of our argument, religion is to be protected,
what other religion can be meant than the Christian religion? That
is the religion of our nations; none other is. While the stated distinction
may have more of an academic than a practical interest, the
discussion of this question will not be idle, if only for the reason that
it will shed even more light upon our previous statements. Besides,
there are manifest efforts to dislodge Christianity from the life of our
people, and with it all true religion, under the pretext of opposing
church-doctrines and dogmatism. The war against Christianity has not
since the days of a <hi rend='italic'>Celsus</hi> been waged as it is to-day.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
We premise a principle of a general nature. Of conflicting
religions and views of the world, only one can be true; this is
clear to every one who still believes in truth. It is equally clear
that this one truth only can have the right to come forward
and to enlist support in public life as a spiritual power; error
has no right to prevail against truth. Hence it will not do to
say simply: There are also the convictions of minorities in
the state; some claim that none of the existing religions is
the right one, others have dropped all belief in God; in our
times we wish to concede to any conviction the right to enter
into competition with others, provided mockery and abuse are
barred. These remarks are quite true, in the sense that neither
the individual nor the state may directly interfere with conscience
or prescribe opinions: leaving entirely aside the question
whether any one really could have a serious conviction of
atheism. The foregoing is true also in the sense that public
avowal of opinion must not be hindered by individuals. To
interpret this to mean that the state must grant freedom to
any expression of doctrine would be a grave misconception of
the social influence which false ideas are liable to exercise. Does
the state grant this freedom to any kind of medical practice,
<pb n='353'/><anchor id='Pg353'/>
whether exercised skilfully or awkwardly, conscientiously or
unscrupulously?
</p>

<p>
Moral-religious error may in public life expect only <emph>tolerance</emph>&mdash;just
as many other evils must be tolerated, because
their prevention would cause greater evils to arise.
This is the reason why the state may, and often must, grant
freedom of worship even to false creeds, because its denial would
give rise to greater harm to the public weal (<hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi>, 2,
2 q. 10, 11). Freedom of teaching, likewise, must not be
granted in the sense of acknowledging that false doctrines and
truth have equal rights; this would amount to an assassination
of truth. Freedom can be conceded to error for the one reason
only, that by not granting it there would be engendered greater
evils. Consequently, if a state-power, or the organs of its legislative
part, are convinced that the Christian religion is the only
true one, they cannot possibly concede to contrary doctrines the
right to pose as the truth and thus deceive minds; they may be
granted the same freedom in teaching only because restrictive
laws can either not be enforced at all, or not without creating
a disorder that would give rise to greater evils. Hence the
lesser evil must be carefully ascertained.
</p>

<p>
With this general principle in mind, it is easily seen that a
freedom large enough to include an open attack on the fundamental,
rational, truths of religion and morals&mdash;this having
been our subject hitherto&mdash;could be conceded only if disbelief
and atheism had gained so much power as to make impossible
its prohibition. In this case, however, the state should be conscious
of the fact that it allows the undermining of its foundations.
If, in another state, religious feeling were at so low an
ebb, that the freedom of the Christian truth could not be obtained
in any other way than by granting full freedom for everything,
then even such unlimited freedom would be a good thing
to be striven for; of itself a deplorable condition and contrary
to God's intentions, but good as the lesser evil.
</p>

<p>
But let us return to the revealed religion. In the eyes of
those who are convinced that the Christian religion, namely,
the Catholic religion, is the only true religion, the ideal condition
would be to have the entire population united in its
<pb n='354'/><anchor id='Pg354'/>
faithful confession; then matters would simplify themselves in
our case. But this ideal hardly exists anywhere. True, in many
countries the population is almost wholly Christian; but the
denominations are mixed, and many have separated at heart
from Christianity. What standards, then, should rule in this
case?
</p>

<p>
Looking at it specially, the demand of ethical reason is no
doubt this: Nations and governments whose past was Christian,
whose institutions and civilization are still Christian, and
an overwhelming majority of whose members still think and believe
in a Christian way, would fail in their gravest duties if
they would expose or permit the Christian religion to remain
unprotected against the attacks and the attempts at destruction
by a false science, or by conceding to the adversaries of
Christianity equal rights or even preference. The Christian
religion will not be destroyed; but whole nations may lose it,
and its loss will in great measure be the fault of those in whose
hands their fate was laid. Here might be applied <hi rend='italic'>Napoleon's</hi>
well-known saying: <q>The weakness of the highest authority is
the greatest misfortune of the nations.</q>
</p>

<p>
It remains an anomaly that a state, the members of which
for the most part are Christians, should treat this religion with
indifference, and tolerate that its tenets and traditions be
represented as fairy-tales and fables, its moral law as a danger to
civilization, and perhaps its divine Founder as a victim of religious
frenzy. If the state is the expression and the <emph>representative
of its subjects</emph>, then such disharmony between public
and private life is unnatural. Moreover, the Christian religion
is held by the majority of its citizens to be the most precious
legacy of their forefathers; they must demand from the state
<emph>protection for their greatest good</emph>. And this may be
claimed with even greater right by provinces where the population
almost unanimously clings to the creed of their ancestors;
at the colleges in these parts the faithful people will be entitled
to protection more than elsewhere against dangers to its inherited
religion. It would be unnatural in this case to apply the thoughtless
principle of dealing uniformly with all provinces of the state.
The state is not a heap of uniform pebbles, but an organism
<pb n='355'/><anchor id='Pg355'/>
composed of different parts, each desiring to retain its own
peculiar life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Do not say this presumption does not admit of application to our conditions,
the majority of the people of this age being long since estranged
from Christianity. It is true, if we turn our eye only to the more conspicuous
classes of society, the classes that control the newspapers and
mould public opinion, this view might be admitted as to some countries.
But if we look at the masses, those not infected by half-education, then
this opinion is true no longer. And there are many who at heart are
not so distant from faith as it would seem. In public life they pose as
free-thinkers, but their domestic life bears frequently a Christian character.
And often they approach more and more the faith, the older they
grow. This is known to be the fact even of scientists. Instances are
men like <hi rend='italic'>Ampère</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Foucault</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Flourens</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hermite</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bion</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Biran</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Fechner</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Lotze</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Romanes</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Littré</hi>, and others. <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi> claimed that no one who in
his youth disputed the existence of the gods retained this view to his
old age. <q>Christianity,</q> observes <hi rend='italic'>Savigny</hi> rightly, <q>is not only to be
acknowledged as a rule of life, it has actually transformed the world,
so that all our thoughts are ruled and penetrated by it, no matter how
foreign, even hostile, to Christianity they may appear.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is a sign how deeply Christian religion has sunk its roots
into the heart, that it remains <emph>the</emph> religion even for those who
have turned away from it. To be sure, for our nations Christianity
is <emph>the</emph> religion. For them the religion of a <hi rend='italic'>Confucius</hi>
or <hi rend='italic'>Zoroaster</hi> does not enter into consideration; nor any of the
products of modern religious foundations, which would replace
Christianity with substitutions of all kinds of religious
essences; they are on a level with the attempts at reconstructing
sexual ethics: both are regrettable delusions. <q>Improvement</q>
of Christian morality is tantamount to abandoning all morals,
and desertion from the Christian religion, amongst our people,
has always been apostasy from all religion. The Christian religion
is so true, that no one can renounce it inwardly and then
find peace in a self-made one. And all efforts aimed at displacing
Christianity lead only to an abandonment of all religion.
</p>

<p>
Look at the number of people from whom slander and insinuation
have torn their old religion to be replaced by another&mdash;a
freer, higher religion; their moral decadence soon bears
testimony of the religious consecration which has been given
to them. Woe unto those authorities who, while able to oppose,
are indifferent, and who lend a hand in causing Christian thought
<pb n='356'/><anchor id='Pg356'/>
to withdraw more and more from our mental atmosphere, to be
replaced by another spirit, a spirit that will gradually control the
decision of the judge, the practice of the physician, the instruction
of the teacher, and thus more and more enter into the life
of the people.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is not assured to those nations of Europe, whose public life is
feeding to-day upon the remnants of their Christian past, that they
will not relapse into a state of moral and religious barbarity. <q>Maybe
civilized mankind, or our nation at least, is really losing its hold more
and more upon definite moral standards,</q> so complains a modern pedagogue;
<q>possibly the emancipation of sensuality will increase without
end, perhaps we have passed forever the stage of true humanity and of
a live idealism, and we shall henceforth glide downward.... These are
no mere, feverish dreams; there is good reason for facing these possibilities
with a determined eye, and no accidental or philosophical optimism
can ignore them</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Münch</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<q>It is quite possible,</q> we are told by another, <q>that much will go
down in our old Europe during the next centuries; and the downfall
will not be restricted by any means to Church and Christianity,
and in the crises that will come Europe will hardly get the needed
support from an æsthetic heathendom, from the Monists' Union, or
from the evidences of science</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Troeltsch</hi>).
</p>

<p>
If it does not come to it, it will not be the merit of authorities
who let the vessel of state drift rudderless toward the rocks of
dechristianization.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
They do not realize that they greatly endanger thereby also
the foundations of the state. <emph>The foundations of our governments
rest upon Christianity.</emph> The Christian faith created
the state, created matrimony, family, and the education of
the youth; created the social virtues of loyalty and of obedience.
What we have of religion is Christian, what we
have of the religious support of morality is equally Christian;
<q>Christianity, Christian faith, Christian formation of life penetrates
all vital utterances of the Occidental world like an all-pervading
element</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
</p>

<p>
It is one of the first principles of political prudence not to
shake the foundations upon which the state rests. States
and nations are not ephemeral beings, existing from one day to
the other, they are historical structures measuring their lives
by centuries; past generations join hands with present generations,
deeds and customs of the fathers live on in their sons.
</p>

<pb n='357'/><anchor id='Pg357'/>

<p>
States must remain on the historical tracks on which they have
travelled to success, at least until the new track has stood the
test of reliability. So far anti-Christian philosophy has terribly
shaken governments; it has not yet proved itself a state-conserving
principle.
</p>

<p>
It is a sad condition to see the guardians of states, devoid of
historical appreciation, allow their people to tear themselves
away from the soil wherein reposed the roots from which they
drew life and strength. Sad, too, that complaints are made of
college-professors who abuse freedom in teaching by constructing
an unproved contradiction between knowledge and faith,
by misrepresenting Christian tenets, by lowering the prestige
of the Church, by distorting her historical picture. It would
be regrettable for a Christian state, if the complaint were justified
that for the most part our colleges have become places where
religion is ignored; where the name of Jesus Christ, the Redeemer
of mankind, is no longer mentioned; where the name
of God never occurs in history, in natural and political science;
where religion is considered the most unessential factor of mental
life, a factor that has nothing to offer, that can answer no
question&mdash;a treatment which, by the force of suggestion, must
lead young men to think that religion is of no account. It is a
banishment which in its effect is little different from an attack
upon religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Sadder still would it be if the following view were to prevail at
our colleges: <q>A right of the student to see protected and not destroyed
any views and convictions, including those of a religious nature,
which he may bring to the university from his home surroundings, from
his preliminary education, as it is asserted time and again in the frequent
complaints about the dechristianizing of youth at the universities&mdash;does
not exist and cannot exist, because it would be in contradiction
to the very essence of the university and its tasks</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Jodl</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Is not this the ethical principle of the bird of prey? Is it not
allowed to guard the defenceless chick against the hawk? Christian
people send their sons to the university, and demand that the education
of the parental home be spared, that the inexperience of youth be
not misused. The state must demand that the religious-moral education
which it furthers in its public schools be not destroyed by the
higher schools. Yet, all these rights must be silenced the moment the
vision of the absolute freedom of teaching makes its appearance, since
to refrain from dechristianizing the youth would be contrary to his
tasks.
</p>

</quote>

<pb n='358'/><anchor id='Pg358'/>

<p>
If such abuse in the management of the power of knowledge,
within and without colleges, is not counteracted by all possible
means, then none need be surprised when a science free from
religion and Christianity is followed by an elementary school
free from religion, when in public and preparatory schools the
free-thinking teacher is telling the pupils that there is no creation
but only evolution, and that the gospels and biblical history
are poetical stories such as the Nibelungenlied and the
Iliad and Odyssey.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We cannot be astonished to find the following rules advocated for the
instruction in public schools: <q>Religious instruction in schools should
not differ from the instruction in other subjects, namely, one of full
freedom, bound only by recognized documents and personalities of
religious literature and religious science. The school must teach that
which is, it must present the tenets of all times and all nations
in so far as this is possible within its modest compass.... But
if the pupil should ask, What really is? What position should
the teacher assume toward this question? In my opinion, he should
speak in plain terms. He should say: There are people who believe
all that is taught by the different systems of religion.... The child
may further ask of the teacher whether he himself believes. No
teacher who claims the confidence of the children should shirk the
answer. He may confess his faith or disbelief, without need of worry.
It cannot hurt his prestige in the eyes of the child, because, if for no
other reason, either way he will find himself in an equally large and
good company</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Tews</hi>).
</p>

<p>
But we hear much more radical utterances. For instance, the
official organ of teachers in a Catholic country urges defection from
the Church in the following words: <q>How long will Social-Democracy,
now so formidable, remain inactive against clerical arrogance? How
much longer will it shirk a duty that is clear to the dullest eye? If the
millions of our Social-Democrats, including the women and children,
would break away from Rome, the priestcraft in Austria is as good as
defeated. A grave responsibility rests upon the Social-Democratic
leaders. Should they miss the moment to act, they will be judged by
history!</q> (Deutsch-oesterreichische Lehrerzeitung, June 1, 1909).
</p>

<p>
Another organ of teachers declares Christianity to be nothing else
but <emph>victorious heresy</emph>, for which Christ had to lay down His life
the same as <hi rend='italic'>Giordano</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hus</hi>, and countless others. <q>The subject of
religion as taught in the preparatory schools is for the most part
taken from ages whose customs and morals are&mdash;happily&mdash;no longer
ours.</q> We see radicalism rampant in large circles of public school
teachers, demanding noisily, excitedly, and, of course, in the name of
modern science and enlightenment, the abolition of the divine service,
of prayer, and religious instruction in school, giving as reason that, <q>as
to matters of mental freedom no difference should be made between a
<pb n='359'/><anchor id='Pg359'/>
university and a village school.</q> That our people will <q>carelessly
waste their Christian patrimony, this is the great danger.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Our argument is not that only Catholics should be professors,
nor even to limit the teaching office to Christians. But one
thing must be demanded of the college-teacher, that he possess
the pedagogic qualifications to render him competent of educating
the hope of the Christian people. As a rule this demands
a religious, Christian disposition. One thing the state must
absolutely demand of the teacher, that he have appreciation for
the foundations of the Christian state; he who has no understanding
for the historical forms of the life of a nation, who
even regards them with hostility, should remain away from
this vocation.
</p>

<p>
In the United States the Jesuit Order has five free universities,
founded and directed by the Order. Their professors
are not all Catholics; there are professors of other creeds,
even Jews. All work in harmony to the common end of the
university.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Men who sincerely and conscientiously strive for the interests of
science will everywhere show not only consideration, but even understanding
and respect, for what is true in the ideas of others. <q>I
gaze,</q> so writes Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Smolka</hi>, <q>upon the likenesses of my venerable
Protestant masters, under whom I studied at Göttingen. Thirty-seven
years have passed since I went to them, in full confidence to find in
their school the leaders who would be free from the influence of the
Catholic view of the world. To their profound knowledge I owe, first
of all, the emancipation from the prejudices I was raised in, from
the views of an atmosphere devoted to Indifferentism in which I had
passed my youth. Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Waitz</hi> opened my eyes to the grandeur of the
Catholic Church in the course of the centuries, in the repeated prostration
of the Papacy and its ever-following rise to unsuspected
heights, a fact unparalleled in the history of human institutions. Prof.
<hi rend='italic'>Lotze</hi> rebuked me at the very beginning of my studies at Göttingen
for a slighting remark about scholastic philosophy: later he imbued
me with profound respect for it and for the wealth of problems it
embraces. These scientists, Protestants without exception and in
exclusively Protestant surroundings, inoculated me with sincere love
for scientific truth, regardless of the consequences it would lead to.
They also introduced the youthful mind to the tried methods of scientific
research, indicating the boundaries where the domain of research
ends and the right of dogma, or arbitrary rule of subjective imagination,
begins.</q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<pb n='360'/><anchor id='Pg360'/>

<div>
<head>Restriction of Right.</head>

<p>
We need no further proof that the state is justified in restricting
the freedom of teaching, whenever demanded by the
business of the state as described above. Restriction of this
kind can be considered unjustified only by a state theory of
liberalism, which holds that the object of the state consists in
merely protecting individual liberty, no matter if this liberty
should lead to the gravest injuries so long as it does not affect
the freedom of others; a theory which changes the state community
from an integral organism into a conglomeration of
autonomous individuals. <hi rend='italic'>Lasalle</hi> scornfully termed this theory
the <q>nightwatchman idea</q> of the state. The state has the
right and the duty to exert a necessary influence upon the pursuit
of science, especially at the universities. Against it the
pleading of <emph>autonomy of the college</emph> and its teacher will not
hold. They have a certain autonomy, that was even greater
in former times. An important part of it is the right to propose
appointments for vacant chairs. It must be admitted that
this method of appointment is proper; it vouches for the scientific
fitness of the appointee, and will prove a protection against
the exercise of undue political influence and ministerial absolutism,
provided that this method is impartially exercised. But
an autonomy that disputes the right of the state to protect its
interests, where free science conflicts with it, that would demand,
as has been asserted, that <q>no infringement of the freedom
in teaching must be deduced from the official position as
teacher,</q>&mdash;such autonomy would be a palpable misconception of
the dependency of the college-teacher and of the social service of
science. The rules that apply to other, non-judicial, officers
should apply to teachers appointed by the state, and offences in
their office, or conduct injurious to the purpose and the dignity
of their office, should be treated similarly as in the case of other
public servants. Nor should members of the legislature be forbidden
to defend the rightful interests of their constituents in
regard to schools. They are elected by the people for this purpose,
and the people have a claim on the schools, which are supported
<pb n='361'/><anchor id='Pg361'/>
by their taxes and to which some of their greatest interests
are attached.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It has been demanded to concede to college-teachers the independence
and immunity of judges. This, however, would be overlooking
the vast difference between professors and judges. The judge has
to render legal decisions in concrete cases, according to existing laws;
in order to lessen the danger of his being guided by outside considerations
he is given a large measure of independence. But what questions
has the college-professor to decide? Mathematical or physical
questions? There his incorruptibility is not in such danger that he
must be made independent of government. Religious and moral questions,
questions of views of the world? These he is not compelled to
decide. Neither state nor people have appointed him to question, time
and again, the fundamental foundations of human life, and to render
decisions which nobody requested.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
It is not clear why science, pleading its independence, should
oppose justified restrictions. As a matter of fact <emph>this independence
does not exist anywhere</emph>. Numerous are the
considerations, often unwarranted, it is actually tied to, yea, often
tied to by its own hands. He who is familiar with scientific
doings, especially academic doings, knows numbers of such ties&mdash;there
is the professional opinion in scientific circles; woe unto him
who in his scientific works dares to confess a supernatural view
of the world!&mdash;ties of the predominance of certain leaders or
schools, without or against whose favor it is difficult to attain
recognition, approval, or position; the ties of parties and cliques
in an academic career; the tie, too, of that insinuating power
of the state that confers much-desired decorations and titles.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
<q>Where is this freedom of science?</q> asks a modern academic teacher.
<q>Some will say science and its teaching are free in our country. True,
it is so written on paper. But those charged with keeping this principle
inviolate are human. For instance the monists have the chief
voice in appointments to zoölogical chairs. They will propose only scientists
who are not opponents to the monistic faith. Far be it from
me to assume any <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>mala fides</foreign>. They simply believe that only their faith
is the proper one to promote science. But I ask again, where is the
freedom of science?</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Dahl</hi>).
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>H. St. Chamberlain</hi> tells of an amusing incident in his life: <q>Many
years ago, when I desired to devote myself to an academic career, a
chemist said to me: <q>My dear fellow, since you belong to the profession,
I tell you as a friend that it is not enough for you to be proficient:
you should try, first of all, to marry the daughter of one of the professors,
<pb n='362'/><anchor id='Pg362'/>
of a privy counsellor if possible.</q> <q>This advice comes too late,</q>
I replied, <q>I am already married.</q> My well-wisher was visibly shocked.
<q>What a pity! Too bad! You don't realize what an influence this has
here upon one's career.</q> What trouble I had to obtain even the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>venia
docendi</foreign>! and then I stuck fast and could not budge despite all achievements
until I undertook to marry the daughter of one of the <q>head-wirepullers</q>;
then things were fixed within three months. I may have
looked at him in a peculiar way, for his wife was a veritable Xanthippe,
and, he added with a laugh: <q>You know I am all day at the laboratory,
from morning until late at night.</q></q> There is nothing new under the
sun. In the year of grace, 1720, <hi rend='italic'>Johann Jacob Moser</hi> started his lectures
in Tuebingen, but could get no audience. <q>No wonder, even a
cleverer man than I would not have fared better at that time, when
everything depended on nepotism.</q> The young man had crossed Chancellor
<hi rend='italic'>Pfaff</hi> by rejecting a marriage arrangement (<hi rend='italic'>Horn</hi>).
</p>

<p>
One will find these things very human. Moreover, it would be unwarranted
to assume that they happen always and everywhere. But
they prove that the pursuit of science rests also on general human
grounds, and does not always remain aloft, in the ethereal heights of
pure truth.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Freedom of Teaching in History.</head>

<p>
When we said that it is the duty of the state to protect the
common benefits of life against injury by freedom in teaching,
and to stand guard over its Christian past, we stated nothing
but what has been the conviction of the Christian nations and
their rulers up into the nineteenth century. Absolute freedom
in teaching cannot plead the support of history, it is only of
yesterday. History shows it to be the natural child, not
of the first awakening of the consciousness of freedom, but
of <emph>the de-Christianizing of the modern state</emph>. Its official
entry coincides with the increasing de-christianizing of
public life during the nineteenth century, after the modern
state adopted more and more the principles of liberal thought.
A naturalistic view of the world, without faith, was struggling
for supremacy; science had to proclaim it as higher enlightenment,
and vehemently urged freedom in its behalf. The
state receded step by step, confused by the commanding note
in the new demands, by high-sounding words about the rights
of science; it allowed itself to be talked into the belief that it
must become the leader in the new course, and it took the banner
that was forced into its hands. It has always been so; claims
<pb n='363'/><anchor id='Pg363'/>
presented with impudence will intimidate, and assume in the
eyes of many the appearance of right.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In so far as it signifies the removal of the religious-moral bars in
teaching, the freedom in teaching developed first in Protestant Germany,
together with the increasing change of universities into state
institutions. Reformation and the ensuing <emph>Enlightenment</emph> had gradually
prepared the way for it. Neither the rationalism nor the pietism
of the eighteenth century could have an understanding for the
tenets of the faith. In addition there was the confusion engendered by
the multiplication of Protestant denominations, none supported by an
overtowering spiritual authority; it led more and more to the
parting between science and religious confession; political reasons,
too, made it desirable to disregard confessions. Thus the severance
of science from religion increased and the <q>freedom of teaching</q> in this
sense was finally adopted also by Catholic states as an achievement.
</p>

<p>
The enlightenment that had developed outside of the universities
made its entry into the halls of universities chiefly under the Prussian
Minister <hi rend='italic'>von Zedlitz</hi>, a champion of enlightenment and a friend of
the philosophers <hi rend='italic'>Wolff</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>. That the universities at that
time were controlled by free-thinkers is illustrated by a saying of
<hi rend='italic'>Frederick II.</hi> On January 4, 1774, <hi rend='italic'>von Zedlitz</hi> asked of the king
whether <hi rend='italic'>Steinhauss</hi>, M.D., should be denied the appointment for professor
extraordinary at Frankfort-on-the-Oder, for the reason that he
was a Catholic. The king decreed in his own handwriting that <q>This
does not matter if he is clever; besides, doctors know too much to have
belief</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Bornhak</hi>).
</p>

<p>
In the year of the Revolution, 1848, freedom of teaching became a
political catch-word. <q>The terms freedom of teaching and freedom of
learning, that became popular in 1848, when any phrase compounded
with freedom could not be often enough repeated, have been ever since
reminiscent of barricades, and men who have witnessed those times become
nervous at their mere sound</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Billroth</hi>).
</p>

<p>
What was understood by freedom in teaching at the turning point
of the eighteenth century is shown by the demand of <hi rend='italic'>Thomasius</hi> for
<q>freedom of doctrines that are not against God and the state.</q> The
first move was to break away from <emph>human</emph> authorities, <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> and
others. Thus the Kiel University, by its regulation of January 27, 1707,
ordered that <q>no faculty should enslave itself to certain principles or
opinions, in so far as they are dependent on a human authority</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Horn</hi>).
</p>

<p>
In Göttingen and Halle freedom of teaching also became the maxim,
and <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Libertas sentiendi</foreign>,</q> as <hi rend='italic'>Münchhausen</hi> declared, <q>was open to every
one and not restrained by statute, except that there should be taught
nothing <emph>ungodly</emph> and <emph>Unchristian</emph>.</q> In those days this restriction
was looked upon as a matter of course. It is known that <hi rend='italic'>Kant</hi>
was disciplined by Minister <hi rend='italic'>Woellner</hi> in 1794, because of his treatise on
religion; at Koenigsberg this reproof was accepted with good grace,
and both the philosophical and the theological faculties pledged themselves
not to lecture on <hi rend='italic'>Kant's</hi> religious philosophy. As recently as the
<pb n='364'/><anchor id='Pg364'/>
middle of the nineteenth century a restriction in this sense was ordered
by the Prussian Minister <hi rend='italic'>Eichhorn</hi>, and the restriction was observed.
The Materialist <hi rend='italic'>Moleschott</hi> was cautioned in 1845 by the Senate of Heidelberg
University, and in reply he resigned his post; in the following
year at Tübingen <hi rend='italic'>Büchner's venia legendi</hi> was cancelled, because, as
he himself stated, <q>it was feared I would poison with my teaching
the minds of my young students</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Horn</hi>).
</p>

<p>
In 1842, <hi rend='italic'>Bruno Bauer</hi>, the radical Bible-critic, was removed by the
Prussian faculties from the academic chair because of his writings.
<hi rend='italic'>D. Strauss</hi> lectured on philosophy at Tübingen, but was forced to resign
when the first volume of his <q>Life of Jesus</q> appeared in 1835.
Later on, when called by the authorities of Zurich to the chair for
Church history and dogmatics, an emphatic protest of the people made
the appointment impossible.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
While showing a regrettable indifference for attacks against
religion, the modern states, inoculated with the principles of
Liberalism, have not entirely forgotten their traditions. Many
sections in their penal codes still protect religion, not only
against defamation, but, as is the case in Austria, also against
public anti-Christian propaganda, and the <q>religious-moral education</q>
in public schools is made compulsory by law. Of course
there is a contradiction, between the conviction of the state that
the principles of morals and religion must be preserved, and the
grant of full freedom to an anti-religious misuse of science,
whose effect upon the masses is unavoidable. It is a contradiction
to tear down the dam at the river and then erect emergency
levees against the onrushing flood. The amazing presumption,
that holds inviolate and sacred everything that poses
under the name of science, is the fault of it all.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Freedom of Teaching and Party Rule.</head>

<p>
In some countries the complaint is heard that a certain
faction has obtained control of the universities, and so exercises
its control that those who are not of its bent of mind are
excluded from both teaching and taking part in the administration
of its affairs, despite the fact that freedom in teaching
and learning has been guaranteed by the state. It is the
faction that professes free-thought and cultivates the freedom
of science in this sense. This condition forces students faithful
<pb n='365'/><anchor id='Pg365'/>
to their religion to study in a strange atmosphere, and they
are looked upon as strangers. The parties so accused seek to
disclaim these charges as unjust; for they feel that, if justified,
it would disclose an unlawful condition of things. Nevertheless
the facts are so notorious, that all protestations will be without
avail.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
These facts must be painful to the sense of justice, order, and
good-fellowship; and to this sense it is not pleasing to deal further with
matters which have often been the cause for indignant resentment, and
to go into concrete details. We shall but briefly recall to mind how
persistently candidates for academic positions are pushed aside when
they are known to be of staunch Catholic mind. This is borne out by
their trifling percentage among the large number of college-teachers;
by the high pressure that is often needed to lift the embargo for a
<emph>Catholic</emph>; by assaults which not seldom resulted in physical violence.
This small number is glaringly emphasized by the considerable, even
disquieting, number of college lecturers of Jewish extraction. Furthermore,
there is the improper usage that the theological faculty is passed
over at the annual election of the rector, and likewise, that teachers
even of lay-faculties are excluded from academic offices when they profess
themselves openly as Catholics.
</p>

<p>
Catholic students have seen themselves treated as strangers at more
than one university; they were not given the usual privileges, and were
accorded rights only in the proportion that their number had to be
reckoned with. Their corporate bodies were ignored, self-evident rights
either denied or grossly violated.
</p>

<p>
As to the small number of religious-minded lecturers at colleges
it is not to be denied that the number of those who combine fervent
religious persuasion with high scientific efficacy is not considerable
these days. Their long suppression furnishes a reason for it, but not
the only one. A modern university professor rightly states: <q>While
there never has been a want of courageous, determined confessors of
the Catholic faith who have occupied a prominent, even leading, position
in the progress of science, in the perfection of methods and means of scientific
research, they were and still are the exception. They were men
of <emph>self-reliance and independent</emph> judgment, who were able to exempt
themselves from an humble submission to the powerful view of the
world, which emanates from the hatred of Christianity and prevails in
educated circles. The issue is still the same secular contrast between
the two views of the world, which <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> illustrated with unsurpassed
mastery as long as fifteen hundred years ago. But the view of
the world which has been in the ascendant in scientific circles long since,
has certainly nothing in common with scientific research.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Our task, however, is not to examine the facts, but to prove
that such conditions are unlawful, no matter where and
<pb n='366'/><anchor id='Pg366'/>
when found. We do not wish to discuss further the fact that
a university polity, exclusively in the spirit of a liberalism that
gradually goes over into radicalism, would constitute a grave
danger for Christian traditions. Indifference to the Christian
and every other religion, or to an extent direct rejection,
must make it appear more and more inferior and obsolete
in the eyes of educated circles; this view will then easily
find its way to the people. Nor do we intend to enlarge
upon a second point, viz., the interest of science itself. The
kernel of liberal research in the province of the spiritual is
a frivolous agnosticism, with a rigid bondage to its naturalistic
postulates, with which we have become sufficiently acquainted.
Principles of this kind are poison for true science. For this
reason alone it is necessary that a Christian philosophy be
placed by the side of a philosophy in fear of metaphysics, one
that never extends beyond puzzles and problems; that a history
guided by Christian principles be placed alongside of one inspired
by anti-ecclesiastical sentiment; in general that a spirit of
veracity assert itself, which would give an example, from the
home of highest culture, not of vain arrogance, but of that mental
firmness which, conscious of the limits of human knowledge,
is also ready to believe. How can our universities remain the
seats of sterling mental life, if the highest power of truth that
has ever been, the Christian religion, is ignored there, and even
maligned; and if in its stead is cultivated a philosophical-religious
research which leads only to the negation of everything
that hitherto was our ideal, and which gives birth to a mental
anarchy, which, before the forum of history, makes it a principle
of pauperization.
</p>

<p>
One point to be particularly emphasized is the <emph>violation
of rights and the oppression of mental liberty</emph>, resulting
from a party-rule in the realm of higher education. Under
a government of law every one, assuming he possesses the
necessary qualification, has an equal right to teach: this is elemental
to freedom of teaching. The state with its institutions
exists for the benefit of all classes, not for one certain class that
has formed the notion that it is the sole bearer of science.
Enemies of the state should be excluded from teaching, but not
<pb n='367'/><anchor id='Pg367'/>
good citizens. Nor can it be demanded, as a necessary preliminary
for academic teaching, that one must subscribe to the
catch-phrases of any particular party, and so discard one's religious
belief. And there is the violation of the rights of faithful
Christian people. Since their money in the form of taxes maintains
to a large extent the schools and their teachers, they surely
can demand a conscientious administration of their interests,
and a representation of the Christian view of the world, in a
way becoming its past and its dignity; Christian people can
demand that their sons receive an education in consonance
with their Christian convictions, and that the universities will
train officials, physicians, and teachers, in whom they may have
confidence. If there are no other but state universities in a
country, and these are monopolized by a free-thought party, then
a condition of mental bondage will arise for those of a different
mind. They are compelled either to have their sons forego
the learned profession, or else expose them to an atmosphere
wherein they see danger of a religious and moral nature, in ideas,
association, and example. No right is left to them, but the right
to pay taxes toward the budget of education, and then to look
on how an irreligious party is striving to turn the higher schools
into training camps of obligatory liberalism, and to monopolize
the entire mental life for this purpose. Now and then there
is great indignation against state monopolies; it is said, shall
the state determine what kind of cigars I should smoke, and
what I am to pay for them! Now, then, where is freedom if
the majority of the Christian population is to be forced into
taking mental nourishment it does not desire and rejects, and
pay for it besides? If we recall to mind the past, which gave
birth to the most venerable universities of the present, a sorrowful
feeling comes over us. We see how far our colleges have
deviated from their original purpose, how our governments have
lost their old traditions. Promotion of the Christian religion
and of the fear of God, was the lofty aim which their founders
had in mind.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
In bestowing the charter upon Vienna University, Duke <hi rend='italic'>Albrecht</hi>
stated that he beheld in the university an institution <q>whereby the
glory of the Creator in heaven and His true faith on earth would be
<pb n='368'/><anchor id='Pg368'/>
furthered, knowledge would be increased, the state benefited, and the
light of justice and truth brightened.</q> And when, in 1366, he donated
property to the university, he declared the object of the donation to be
<q>that the university may increase the prosperity of the entire Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
When Leopold I, on April 26, 1677, signed the charter of Innsbruck
University he declared that he founded this university pre-eminently
for the protection and prosperity of the Catholic Religion, as a means
for its preservation, and also that many of those who had lost the
faith might be led back to religion, for the honour and the glory of the
Tyrol.
</p>

<p>
In the charter of Tübingen University, <hi rend='italic'>Eberhard</hi> of Württemberg
states: <q>I believe I can do no better work, none more helpful to
gain salvation, none more pleasing to the eternal God, than to provide
with special diligence and emulation for the instruction of good
and zealous young men in the fine arts and sciences, to enable them
to recognize God, to know, to honour, and to serve Him alone.</q> <q>In
those days there was no hesitation to assign to science the loftiest vocation
and to declare ... that, coming from God, science should also lead
back to Him as its origin.... The school was charged to work for the
spread and the defence of the true belief. Christian truth was once
queen at these universities; now, she has only too often become a
stranger, to be denounced at times if she attempts to knock at the
portals of her old home</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Probst</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Free Universities.</head>

<p>
Another manner, to provide proper freedom of teaching,
is open to the modern state by incorporating free universities.
Unlike the state institutions, they are not directly controlled
by the state, but are independent of it in their internal
affairs; they are founded and managed by private persons or
societies. Universities of this kind are found in Belgium and
in England, to some extent in France, but their home is chiefly
in the United States. At the head of the free university of the
United States is the president, with a governing body and a
board of trustees elected from members of the university; they
appoint teachers, prescribe schedules of study and examinations,
and conduct its business. True, the state cannot relinquish its
right to oppose a system of teaching dangerous to the common
weal; it will also provide that those to be licensed to practice
the professions possess the necessary education and training;
but the state refrains from further interference in the management
of free universities.
</p>

<p>
It is no doubt difficult to establish by private means universities
<pb n='369'/><anchor id='Pg369'/>
equally efficient with those of the state; in the countries
of Middle Europe this undertaking is perhaps more difficult than
elsewhere, but the possibility is there, and it is even realized
in some places. This, however, is not a question to occupy us
here; we merely wish to declare, if similar foundations are
about to be undertaken, and the necessary conditions are
present, then the state must not prevent them, it must grant
freedom in teaching.
</p>

<p>
True, the state is obliged to assist its subjects in acquiring
material and spiritual goods, but only in so far as private means
are insufficient thereto: the state must only act in a supplemental
way. If it does that which its citizens themselves are
able to do, then the state is needlessly abridging their free
right. This includes the establishment of schools and the teaching
in them. Presuming fitness, everybody has a <emph>natural
right</emph> to teach others; hence, also, to found schools, whether
by himself or jointly with others. Furthermore, instruction
is a part of education, even at the university; it could
hardly be said of the graduate of the preparatory school
that his education is completed. Education, however, is a
matter for the parents. Their rights would be infringed upon,
if needlessly forced by the state to intrust their sons exclusively
to the state colleges and to their method of teaching.
How could the state's exclusive right to teach be proved?
Does the pursuit of science belong to its domain? No one will
care to claim this. If science were to be allotted to the jurisdiction
of any one body, the Church would be the first to enter
into consideration, because of her international and spiritual
character. Or is this right to be conceded to the state because
it is to be the bearer of culture? The state is to promote culture,
but not to prescribe a certain brand of it. The argument
that private universities cannot be founded and conducted in
the proper way is certainly not borne out by the facts.
</p>

<p>
Even if the state, owing to its superior facilities, could provide
better universities than private effort, it would not be entitled
to the monopoly; the fact of being able to do something
better does not secure the sole privilege of doing it. Moreover,
in order to attract students, free universities will have to
<pb n='370'/><anchor id='Pg370'/>
emulate state universities. The right of the state to found
universities will of course not be disputed; but this right must
not deteriorate into a disguised monopoly, that would grant
privileges to its own universities, and deny them to free
universities in order to put them out of existence. At any rate,
the state will always retain considerable influence over the
studies at free universities. It may require certain standards in
candidates for political and professional positions, for judges
and lawyers, teachers at state schools, physicians; it may
insist upon state examinations, or it may make its stipulations
for recognizing the examinations and academic degrees of the
free schools.
</p>

<p>
By free schools of higher learning, a greater degree of freedom
in teaching and in learning would be assured, or, speaking
generally, a greater freedom in the intellectual life. If these
higher institutions of learning are exclusively in the hands of
the state, it cannot fail that the higher intellectual life will
be dangerously dependent upon the state, or fall into the control
of a dominating clique. As an example might be cited the
restrictions placed upon jurisprudence by Prussia in the eighteenth
century; the long-continued control of Hegelian philosophy;
the Université Impériale of Napoleon; the predominance
of anti-Catholic thought in our own schools. Universities,
founded upon a positive, Christian basis, would surely be a
comfort for thousands.
</p>

<p>
No need to say that such foundations may also be undertaken
by the Church. This right cannot be denied to the Church,
just as little as to any other corporation. Nay, much less! Because
of its intellectual and international character science is
most closely related to the Church. The latter, furthermore, has
an eminent, historical right; no one has done more for the
foundation and promotion of the European universities than
the Church.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
A remarkable and at the same time <emph>characteristic attitude</emph> towards
free, particularly Catholic, universities is assumed by Liberalism. The
stereotyped objection to Catholic universities is known; it can be reduced
to this formula: At a Catholic university there can be no freedom
in research nor freedom in teaching; but without them there can be no
science; consequently, a Catholic university is a contradiction. It is
<pb n='371'/><anchor id='Pg371'/>
the same old song: there is but one science, there is but one freedom&mdash;the
free-thought that rejects belief. If it is really so obvious that
a Catholic university is a contradiction to science, hence incapable to
foster it, why the excitement? Either such universities are incompetent,
or they are not. Let the experiment go on; the result will tell.
If the result is certain, as is claimed, very well, one may serenely await
it. Liberalism shows itself again here in the shape of that nasty hybrid
of freedom and intolerance for which it is known. It is the head of
Janus with its two faces: the one showing the bright mien of freedom,
the other the sinister scowl of an intolerant tyrant. They shout
for freedom, freedom they demand; Church and Revelation are put
under the ban, because they restrain freedom. The state is denounced
as soon as it wants to interfere. But if others attempt research free
and independently, though not just so as Liberalism would like, then
tyranny immediately takes the place of liberty, the herald of freedom
resorts to oppression, and those who just now proclaimed the independence
of universities from the state, who protested against the interference
of the state in science, turn about and loudly call for the help of
the state, avowing that science can thrive only under state control.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Church and the Universities.</head>

<p>
In discussing the position of the social authorities toward
freedom of teaching, we have chiefly considered the state. Of
the Church we shall say but a brief word. It will suffice to
recall what has been said previously; what has been stated
about the relation of the Church to freedom of research, applies
in many respects equally to freedom of teaching. Little will
have to be added. The Church, and the Church alone, has
received from her divine Founder the command to preserve the
doctrine of revelation and to proclaim it to mankind. <q>Going,
therefore, teach ye all nations</q>&mdash;this is the commission of
the Lord.
</p>

<p>
For this reason the teaching of the revealed truth, Theology,
is the privilege of the Church. But the rest of the sciences
will not be exempt from the obligation to listen to the admonition
of the God-appointed authority, in all cases where
religious grounds are invaded. To the Church is intrusted the
religious-moral guidance of her faithful; she cannot remain indifferent,
when in the public teaching of science a system is
followed detrimental to the Christian principles of the faithful.
And whoever has entered the Church by baptism, remains subject
to her authority in all matters within her sphere.
</p>

<pb n='372'/><anchor id='Pg372'/>

<p>
The state must acknowledge these rights of the Church, or
else forfeit its claim to be a Christian state; these rights, belonging
to the essence of the Christian religion, are guaranteed
by God, and are independent of human sanction. Hence, in
case of clashes in this respect, the state must listen to the
grievances of the Church; this will chiefly concern Theology,
rarely other sciences. Thus it would be partially correct to say
that the theological faculties are subject to the Church, but those
of the rest of the sciences to the power of the state. But only
partially; spiritual interests cannot be marked out by faculties.
Interests of faith may be also violated in other faculties:
then cases may arise which lose their purely worldly character,
and extend into the religious sphere of the Church. If a professor
should lecture on a matter touching closely upon interests
of faith, for instance, Catholic Canon law or philosophy, and
should show bias against Church and Christianity, deny its
authority, distort and attack its tenets&mdash;then this would constitute
an evident wrong to the Church and a flagrant violation
of the interests which to guard it is her duty, especially in a
country overwhelmingly Catholic. In that case the Church
would be entitled to make expostulation.
</p>

<p>
In rejecting the protests of the Church in such cases, as
being the interference of a foreign power, the state would
thereby prove that it misunderstands both, the religious vocation
of the Church and the proper relation between state and Church.
For the faithful, whom the state calls its subject, are also
the subjects of the Church, they are the lambs and sheep the
Church is to feed, in obedience to divine command. Church
and state having in common the same subjects, and being closely
connected for so long a time that it has become historical, it
would be unnatural if they were to treat each other as strangers,
such as might be expected in a heathen country, Japan, for
instance. The nature of the case and the weal of the people
demand harmonious action in such matters. It cannot be
denied, moreover, that the Church commonly meets the state
government to the extreme limit of her ability. About the
divine rights of the Church opinions differ, but those able to
fully appreciate the precious benefits of religion and morality
<pb n='373'/><anchor id='Pg373'/>
will regard it as one of the greatest boons to humanity, that
there exists within its fold an organization which protects with
fearless, awe-inspiring majesty these benefits against all attacks,
even against the state and its all-devouring policy of utility,
and in this way defends the mental dignity of the human individual
against oppression by the reckless reality of external life.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Just to show how an avowed free-thinker appreciates the significance
of a commanding spiritual force as against the state we will quote
the French positivist <hi rend='italic'>A. Comte</hi>, who declares: <q>The absorption of the
spiritual by the worldly power is a return to barbarity; the separation
of the two powers, however, is the principle for mental uplift and
moral dignity.</q> <q>True,</q> says he, <q>men struggle in blind aversion
against spiritual power of any kind; yet it will even then prevail,
though in a mistaken way. Professors, authors, and newspaper writers
will then pose as the speculative leaders of mankind, although they
lack all mental and moral qualification for it</q> (Cours de philosophie
positive).
</p>

<p>
Short-sighted perception may upbraid the Catholic Church; but a
far-sighted judgment will have to concede that mankind owes gratitude
to the Church and the Papacy. A noted Protestant writer remarks:
<q>But for the Papacy the Middle Ages would have fallen a prey to barbarity.
Even in our day the liberty of nations would be threatened
with greatest danger if there were no Papacy. It is the most effective
counterpoise to an omnipotent power of the state. If it did not
exist, it would have to be invented</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Hübler</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='375'/><anchor id='Pg375'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Fifth Section. Theology.</head>

<pb n='377'/><anchor id='Pg377'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter I. Theology And Science.</head>

<p>
Now one other, the concluding point. So far our discussion
has dealt almost exclusively with the profane sciences, and
while there were often under discussion general principles, applying
also to theology, we did not refer to the latter expressly for
the reason that it occupies a special position in regard to our
question. Theology is the science of the faith, its subjects
are truths established by divine or inspired authority; hence,
in teaching, authority plays a larger part in this than in any
other science. For this reason much fault is found with theology,
and many consider that it forfeits thereby its claim to
rank as a science. They say it lacks all liberty, the results
are prescribed; it lacks possibility of progress; nothing but rigid
dogmas, rejecting all development and improvement; its vocation
is exhausted by the incessant transmitting of the immutable;
hence it lacks all the essential conditions of a true science,
it has no claim to a place at the university; if it nevertheless
has established itself at the university, as is the case in some
countries, it must be considered as an alien body, a remnant
of an obsolete time.
</p>

<p>
A keen eye cannot fail to detect in these words the prompting
voice of that view of the world which rejects everything supernatural,
and declares that Christian dogmatics and morals, and
ideas of sin, redemption, humility of faith, cross, and self-denial,
do no longer correspond to modern man. At bottom is the
struggle between the two views of the world&mdash;one the philosophy
of modern, sovereign man, the other the contemplation of
the world in the light of Christianity: a process of repulsion,
psychologically easily understood, by which the one seeks to expel
<pb n='378'/><anchor id='Pg378'/>
the other from the position which it desires to occupy. A
closer examination of the matter will show this.
</p>

<div>
<head>Theology as a Science.</head>

<p>
Is theology a science in the proper sense? May it rightly
claim a place among the branches of human science? This
shall be the first question to be answered. Theology, meaning
the doctrine of God, is the science of the Revelation, or of the
faith; of the Revelation which began in the Old Testament
and reached its perfection in Christ, the Son of God, in whom
appeared the fulness of God, the image of the glory of God,
the perfection of all religion; the Revelation intrusted to the
Church to be preserved infallibly, so that by these truths, and
means of salvation, the Church might guide and enrich the
life of believing mankind. Hence, in the broad sense in which
it is understood now, theology is the science that gathers the
revealed truths from their sources, endeavours to grasp and to
defend them, and to deduce new truths from them; which also
studies these truths and the means given for salvation, in their
development and effect in the Christian life.
</p>

<p>
Thus it includes a wide range of subordinate branches, connected
by a common object. The biblical sciences have for
their subject Holy Writ; the sciences of introduction to the
Bible deal with its external history, with historical criticism
playing an important part; exegesis is occupied with the
scientific interpretation of the text and uncovers the treasures
of truth in Holy Writ, assisted in this task by hermeneutics
and a number of philosophical-historical auxiliary sciences.
Ecclesiastical history and its branches of patrology, history
of dogma, ecclesiastical archæology, and art, and other auxiliary
sciences, describe the doctrine of Revelation in its historical
course through the centuries, and its development in the bosom
of the Church. Dogmatics (with apologetics) and morals have
the task to explain and defend the doctrine of faith and morals,
as drawn from the Scriptures and from tradition, to deduce new
truths from them and to unite them all in a system. Finally,
Canon law, and even to a greater degree the departments of
<pb n='379'/><anchor id='Pg379'/>
pastoral theology, homiletics, liturgy, show how the treasures
of Revelation and Redemption find their realization in the
practical life of the Church and of the Christian people.
</p>

<p>
Hence there cannot be any doubt but that theology is a
science in the proper sense, unless a wrong definition of science
is presumed. Of course, if we should identify science in
general with empirical science, and scientific methods with the
methods of natural sciences and mathematics, and refuse to
recognize any results as scientific except those gained by observation
and mathematical calculation, then, of course, theology
would not be a science, nor would many other branches of
knowledge come under this head; the fault, however, would
lie with a narrow conception, that limits itself to the portion
of human knowledge within its vision, ignoring everything
that exists beyond its horizon.
</p>

<p>
What are we to understand by science? It is the systematic
concentration of the knowledge and the research of things according
to their causes; hence of our cognition of a subject
that can be proved by careful demonstration to be certain
or at least probable. This we find to be the case in
theology. It is the sum total, systematically arranged, of
knowledge and researches concerning the tenets of faith, considered
in the abstract, in their history, and in their effects on
the life of the Church. Applying the method of natural
thought, theology first studies the presumptions and foundations
of faith, examines the sources of revelation by the philosophical
and historical-critical method, proves the doctrines of
faith by these sources, endeavours to grasp these truths intellectually,
by the methods of analytical and synthetical thinking, and
to make clear their connection. We have here the same methods
as applied in other sciences: ascertaining the facts, definition of
terms, deduction, induction. In respect to the history of the
Church and to Canon law their similarity with analogous profane
sciences is at once obvious.
</p>

<p>
There is one <emph>difference</emph>: in the theological sciences there
is active, not only rational research, but also the <emph>belief</emph> in revealed
truths. In some departments, like that of ecclesiastical
history, this difference is less pronounced, they proceed by the
<pb n='380'/><anchor id='Pg380'/>
method of critically establishing and connecting the facts;
but they, too, are guided by the conviction that there is in the
life of the Church not only natural causation, but also supernatural
principle. Dogmatics takes faith to a greater degree as
its point of support, in order to connect natural reason with the
convictions of faith, and how richly natural reason may unfold
itself is shown in the works of <hi rend='italic'>St. Augustine</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi>,
on the great mysteries of the faith. As regards faith itself,
we must keep in mind that it has a scientific foundation: the
credibility of revelation is proven, it is a reasoning faith. It
may be likened to history. The historian, on the testimony of
his sources, believes in the actuality of human events, having
convinced himself of the credibility of his sources; this belief
becomes then his starting point for further researches of a pragmatical
nature: he penetrates more deeply into the facts, and
connects them according to their causal relations. The difference
is this: the historian rests upon human authority, the
theologian upon divine.
</p>

<p>
Yet the objection is raised: theology is faith, or at least
rests on faith. Faith, however, has nothing to do with science;
faith is sentiment, whereas science is knowledge. That this view
of faith is wrong, and the result of subjective agnosticism that
denies to man any positive understanding of supernatural
truths, we have shown repeatedly. Certainly, if faith were
nothing but sentiment, no science could be built upon it; you
cannot build stone houses upon water. But the Catholic faith
is not simply sentiment, it is a conviction of reason, based upon
God's testimony that the revealed doctrines are true. In the
same way that the historian&mdash;to use the comparison once more&mdash;believes
positively in his historical facts, on the strength of the
authority of a <hi rend='italic'>Livy</hi> or <hi rend='italic'>Tacitus</hi>, or accepts as proved some events
of ancient times, relying upon the testimony of Babylonian
tablets of clay or upon the pyramids, and makes these events his
starting point for further researches, without having to fear objections
to his work on the ground that knowledge and belief
are incompatible; just so the theologian believes in his religious
truths because they are vouched for by God's testimony. This
proves that the foundation for his further thought is not formed
<pb n='381'/><anchor id='Pg381'/>
by uncontrollable, irrational sentiment, but by a conviction of
reason.
</p>

<p>
Hence, if by knowledge is meant nothing but a conviction
of reason&mdash;and in this sense faith and knowledge are usually
contrasted by modern philosophical writers&mdash;then faith is
knowledge in the proper sense and a contradiction does not exist.
If, however, knowledge is taken to be the understanding gained
by personal insight without reliance on external testimony, then,
of course, there is a distinction, and theology would not be a
science, in so far as it <emph>believes</emph>; just as little as history would
be a science, in so far as it believes its sources. But theology is a
science, in so far as it makes use of experience and reason, examines
its sources, draws from them the facts of faith, and
makes them the starting point for its investigations.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Theology also has mysteries among its subjects, namely, truths whose
actuality is cognizable, but whose contents, while not indeed inconsistent,
yet remain obscure and incomprehensible to us. But even this does
not impair its scientific character. Other sciences share with it this lot
of human limitation. Instances are plentiful in natural science where
the existence of natural forces of one kind or another is proven; of
which it is able to form some idea, but cannot fathom; they remain a
puzzle to science, sometimes presenting the greatest difficulties. For instance,
ether, gravitation, electricity, the nature of motion, and so on.
The noted physicist <hi rend='italic'>J. J. Thomson</hi> says: <q>Gravitation is the secret of
secrets. But the very same holds good of all molecular forces, of magnetism,
electricity, etc. There are in animated nature even more things
we cannot understand. We could say that of the processes of living
organisms we understand practically nothing. Our knowledge of indigestion,
of propagation, of instinct, is so small that we can almost say
it is limited to the enumeration of them. What we do know and understand
is not one thousandth part of what would be necessary for a
knowledge in any degree complete. <q>If we raise an arm,</q> says <hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi>,
<q>or put our teeth in action, we do something that no one can
explain.</q></q>
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Theology and Progress.</head>

<p>
With a very superficial conception of theology we might
easily arrive at the opinion that it lacks a characteristic of
science, which, in our time especially, is insisted upon, namely,
progress. For it must adhere to dogmas and not go beyond
them. Hence, seemingly, there is nothing to do for theology
<pb n='382'/><anchor id='Pg382'/>
but to transmit unchangeable truths, perhaps in different aspects,
but nevertheless the same truths.
</p>

<p>
It must be admitted that one kind of progress is barred in
theology, as also in other sciences; to wit, the progress of
incessant remodelling and reshaping, the continuous tearing
down of the old facts, the eternal search after truth without
ever gaining its possession.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This is often the progress demanded. <q>The new tuition,</q> it is said,
<q>starts from the premise that the truth is to be searched for</q>
(<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>). <q>Science is not a perfected doctrine, but a research, ever
to be revised</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Harnack</hi>). It is particularly demanded of theology
that it procure a <hi rend='smallcaps'>further development of Christianity</hi>, and substitute
for it thoughts which modern age has adopted and which it calls
scientific thinking. <q>There remains the task,</q> they say, <q>of expressing
faith and its objects so as to coincide with the conception formed by
scientific thinking of the natural and historical reality</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
Hence miracles, the divinity of Christ, and mysteries of any kind,
must be eliminated; even the notion of a personal God will have to
be changed to a pantheistic notion: <q>After the great revolution in our
cosmic theories we can no longer think of God, the eternal holy Will that
we revere as First Cause of all things, as the <q>first mover</q> throning
outside and above the universe, as <hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Thomas</hi> did</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>).
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Such a progress is impossible in theology, at least in Catholic
theology, and in any other that still aims to be the theology of
the Christian, revealed religion. It cannot be expected from
theology, nor from any other science, that it will degrade itself
to a fashionable science, that takes for its level not truth but the
variable imperatives and moods of the times, and, destitute of
character, changes with each varying fashion. The science of
faith cannot assume this position, so much the less as it must
be aware that its truths often clash with the inclinations of
the human heart, and that its vocation is to lift up mankind,
not to let itself be dragged down. This kind of progress therefore
is barred. This, indeed, is not progress, but a hopeless
wavering from pillar to post, a building and tearing down,
acquiring without permanent possession, searching without
finding.
</p>

<p>
<emph>True progress</emph> can be shown in theology as in any other
science.
</p>

<p>
The <emph>possibility</emph> of progress is manifest, particularly, in
<pb n='383'/><anchor id='Pg383'/>
Church-history, in the biblical and pastoral sciences: they are
closely related to the profane-historical, philological, social, and
juridical branches of science, hence theology shares in their
progress. It would seem that dogmatics would have to forego
progress. Its progress certainly cannot consist in changing
the revealed doctrines, nor in interpreting differently in
the course of times the formulas of creed; here the rule is,
<foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>veritas Domini manet in aeternum</foreign>. The development of dogmatic
knowledge consists rather in the following: the revealed
truths are in the course of the centuries more and more clearly
perceived and more sharply circumscribed, more surely demonstrated,
more and more extensively appreciated in their connections,
relations, and deductions. The sources of Divine Revelation
flow the richer the more they are drawn from; their truths
are so substantial, so abundant in relation to knowledge and
life, that, the more research advances, the less it reaches its limit.
<q>No one gets nearer to the realization of truth than he who
perceives that in divine things, no matter how far he progresses,
there remains always something more to be examined</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Leo the
Great</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Consider the progress in mathematics. No one will say the
mathematician is doomed to stagnation because he cannot
change the multiplication table or the geometrical propositions.
The increasing mathematical literature, with its big volumes,
contradicts this notion: but its growth of knowledge is not the
zigzag progress of restless to and fro, it is the solid progress
from the seed to the plant.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
As early as the fifth century <hi rend='italic'>St. Vincent</hi> of Lerin described the
progress in dogmatical knowledge: <q>Sed forsitan dicet aliquis:
Nullusne ergo in Ecclesia Christi profectus habebitur religionis?
Habeatur plane et maximus. Nam quis ille est tam invidus hominibus,
tam exosus Deo, qui istud prohibere conetur? Sed ita tamen,
ut vere profectus sit ille fidei, non permutatio. Siquidem ad profectum
pertinet, ut in semetipsum quaeque res amplificetur; ad
permutationem vero, ut aliquid ex alio in aliud transvertatur. Crescat
igitur oportet et multum vehementerque proficiat tam singulorum
quam omnium, tam unius hominis, quam totius Ecclesiae, aetatum ac
saeculorum gradibus, intelligentia, scientia, sapientia, sed in suo
duntaxat genere, in eodem scilicet dogmate, eodem sensu eademque
sententia.... Quodeunque igitur in hac Ecclesiae Dei agricultura fide
Patrum satum est, hoc idem filiorem industria decet excolatur et
<pb n='384'/><anchor id='Pg384'/>
observetur, hoc idem floreat et maturescat, hoc idem proficiat et perficiatur.
Fas est etenim, ut prisca illa coelestis philosophiae dogmata
processu temporis excurentur, limentur, poliantur, sed nefas est, ut
commutentur, nefas, ut detruncentur, ut mutilentur.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
The <emph>proof for the actual progress</emph> of theology is furnished
by its history. It shows how theology has gradually
grown from the first seed of the divine Word, placed by the hand
of God's Son into the soil of humanity, until it became a
great tree, rich in branches and leaves. The holiest men of the
Christian centuries, equipped with the choicest mental forces,
enlightened by the light of grace, have worked on its growth;
toiling and praying, they filled libraries with their books.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
It is not our intention to outline here a sketch of this development.
A few hints may suffice. Hardly had the faith taken root in the civilized
nations of the old times when researches were begun. A long list
of Holy Fathers and ecclesiastical authors were the bearers of the first
development. Drawing upon Greek philosophy in aid and to deepen
their thought in the mental battle against the ancient pagan view of
the world, against Judaism and heresy, they elucidated more and more
the tenets of faith and morals, and endeavoured to draw ever more fully
from their spiritual contents. We encounter among the shining host
men like <hi rend='italic'>Tertullian</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cyprian</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Clement of Alexandria</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Origines</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cyril of
Jerusalem</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Basil</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gregory of Nyssa</hi>, and many others, up to the powerful
dogmatist of the old time, <hi rend='italic'>Augustine</hi>, who treated scientifically and
often extensively the great dogmas of faith. Truly a voluminous theological
literature with a plethora of genius and truth. The great edition
of the Greek and Latin Fathers by <hi rend='italic'>Migne</hi> numbers 382 volumes in
quarto, each of 1,500 pages or more in close print. Comparing with these
382 volumes the modest book of the Bible, which had been their foremost
source, the progress of these centuries becomes manifest.
</p>

<p>
Soon the way was broken for systematizing the tenets of the
faith, especially by <hi rend='italic'>St. John Damascene</hi> (eighth century). Scholasticism
completed the work: it created a systematical whole and
connected theology and philosophy, especially the Aristotelian, into a
harmonious union. Its pioneers were <hi rend='italic'>St. Anselm</hi> and still more
<hi rend='italic'>Petrus Lombard</hi> (died 1160). Then, in the Middle Ages, when universities
began to flourish, there followed the great theologians <hi rend='italic'>Alexander
of Hales</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bonaventure</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Albert the Great</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Scotus</hi>, and chief of all
<hi rend='italic'>Thomas of Aquin</hi> (died 1274), in whom scholasticism reached its perfection,
and undeniably one of the greatest minds known in the history
of science; distinguished by an astonishing prolificness, still more by
a wealth and depth of thought combined with the greatest simplicity
and lucidity in presenting truths, he will for ever remain unapproachable.
The decline of scholasticism during the fourteenth and fifteenth
centuries was followed by a new bloom, when the life of the Church,
rejuvenated by the Council of Trent, gave birth to new forces in
<pb n='385'/><anchor id='Pg385'/>
theology. The mighty tomes of men like <hi rend='italic'>Suarez</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Lugo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Gregory of
Valencia</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Ruiz</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Bañez</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Billuart</hi>, and others joined the volumes of their
predecessors and continued their work. At the same time the various
departments of the science were branching off more and more, and
became independent.
</p>

<p>
<hi rend='italic'>M. Canus</hi> created the theory of theological cognition as an introduction
to dogmatics, <hi rend='italic'>Bellarmin</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Th. Stapleton</hi> founded the newer
controversial theology. Moral Theology became in the sixteenth century
a separate science and was developed by men like <hi rend='italic'>Lugo</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Laymann</hi>,
<hi rend='italic'>Busembaum</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Alphons of Liguori</hi>. Similarly a new period of research
began in the biblical sciences. Not that the first foundations were laid
at that time; there had been <hi rend='italic'>Origines</hi>, who had become the founder of
biblical text criticism by his <q>Hexapla</q>; the Antioch school of exegetes,
<hi rend='italic'>Chrysostomus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hilarius</hi>, and especially <hi rend='italic'>Jerome</hi>. But it was fostered
with renewed zeal. The great Antwerp and Paris polyglots furnished
aids, men like <hi rend='italic'>Maldonatus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Salmeron</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Toletus</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Cornelius</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>á
Lapide</hi>, wrote their exegetic works. To the seventeenth century belongs
the creation of the propædeutics, by <hi rend='italic'>Richard Simon</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Bernard
Lami</hi>. The monumental work, <q>Cursus sacrae scripturae</q> (since 1885),
containing so far thirty-six volumes, demonstrates, among other things,
that there has been in recent years no standstill in the research in Holy
Writ. In the province of ecclesiastical history, too, with its branches
and auxiliary sciences, new life was awakened at that time. In the
sixteenth century, when the defence of the creed by the witnesses of
a former age became urgent, patristics and history of dogma enjoyed
their first rise. <hi rend='italic'>Petavius</hi> was prominently connected with them. How
these sciences have been fostered in the nineteenth century is indicated
by the names of <hi rend='italic'>Mai</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>De Rossi</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hergenroether</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Hefele</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Pastor</hi>. There
remains to be mentioned the gradual establishment of the science
of Canon law, of the pastoral-theological departments which have attained
an independent position since the close of the eighteenth century,
and since then produced a voluminous literature. The fear of a
standstill in theological research seems unwarranted in the light of its
history. The errors of the present time will prevent a standstill.
The more vehement the attacks by natural science and philosophy, by
philology and archæology, the more they seek to shake the foundations
of the Christian religion, the stronger theology must grow by the
combat. The solid progress of our times in knowledge and methodics
will not remain without influence; nor can the empirical, the historical-critical
method, the theory of evolution, and so on, fail to exert
their stimulating influence upon theology.
</p>

<p>
The progress that Catholic theology has made since the days of the
Fathers, the vast amount of mental work it has performed, is perhaps
made most clear by a glance at the <q>Nomenclator literarius theologiae
catholicae,</q> by <hi rend='italic'>H. Hurter</hi> (2d ed., 3 vols.; the 3d ed. is in 6 vols., 5
being ready). It gives in concise briefness the biographical data and
the more important works of Catholic theologians of greater repute.
Counting the names there presented, we find not less than 3,900 from
1109 to 1563; about 2,900 from 1564 to 1663; about 3,900 between 1664
and 1763; finally, from 1764 to 1894 about 4,000 theological authors;
hence in the period from 1109 to 1894 nearly 14,700 theologians. That
<pb n='386'/><anchor id='Pg386'/>
these 14,700 scientists&mdash;and their number is not exhausted by this
figure&mdash;should have written their works without offering in them
any new knowledge, would surely be a bold assertion! In addition
consider the long rows of tomes which some of them wrote.
Perhaps it would not be wholly amiss to refer to the restless zeal
of many of them, as recorded by their biographers. <hi rend='italic'>Baronius</hi> (died
1607) could truthfully assert before his death, that for thirty years
he had never had sufficient sleep; he usually slept only four or five
hours. <hi rend='italic'>Pierre Halloix</hi> (died 1656) likewise was content with four
or five hours of rest. <hi rend='italic'>Dionysius Sanmarthanus</hi> (died 1725) gave only
four hours to sleep and devoted less than half an hour daily to
recreation; likewise <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Combéfis</hi> (died 1679), during the last forty
years of his life. <hi rend='italic'>A. Fr. Orsi</hi> (died 1761) contented himself with
three or four hours of sleep; <hi rend='italic'>Fr. Clement</hi> (died 1793) and <hi rend='italic'>H. Oberrauch</hi>
(died 1808) are said to have slept but two hours daily. <hi rend='italic'>J.
Caramuel de Lobkowicz</hi> (died 1682) persevered for fourteen hours every
day at his books; <hi rend='italic'>Chr. Lupus</hi> (died 1681) even for fifteen hours daily.
The theologian <hi rend='italic'>Lessius</hi> is characterized by <q><hi rend='italic'>Parcissimus erat temporis,
laboris pertinax</hi></q>; the same holds good of hundreds of others of
these men.
</p>

<p>
A science, enumerating its disciples by so many thousands, with
the greatest intellects among its workers, which has commanded so
much zeal and work for centuries, should be safe from the reproach
of having back of it a history of stagnation.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Theology and Freedom of Science.</head>

<p>
To many it seems obvious that theology lacks at least the
other predicate of science, freedom; because it is bound to
dogmas and ecclesiastical authorities, at least Catholic theology
is.
</p>

<p>
Although this claim is pressed persistently and with confidence,
we may dispose of it very briefly. The freedom missed in
theology, and demanded in its behalf, is none other than the
liberal freedom of science, the nature of which we have had
sufficiently long under the searchlight, so that there remains
nothing to be added. We have proved sufficiently that this
freedom is not a freedom from unnatural fetters, but a dissolute
subjectivism, that claims the right not to be bound to any
unchangeable, religious truths. We admit that the Catholic
theology does not possess <emph>THIS</emph> freedom. Convinced of the
truth of the doctrines established by divine testimony, and by the
infallible voice of the Church, theology sees not freedom but a
sin against truth in the license to assert the contrary of what
it has recognized as the truth.
</p>

<pb n='387'/><anchor id='Pg387'/>

<p>
There is but one freedom which science may claim: it is
freedom from hindrance in reaching the truth in its legitimate
domain. If this truth is transmitted to science infallibly, by
the highest instance of wisdom&mdash;and of this every theologian
is convinced&mdash;how can science be said to be hindered thereby
in attaining the truth? Restrained it is, but only by truth:
truth, however, can only be a barrier to license, but not to
precious freedom. This restraint theology shares with the
rest of the sciences. The physicist is tied to the facts brought
forth by the experiments of his laboratory; the astronomer is
tied to the results reported to him by the instruments of his
observatory, the historian is tied to the events disclosed by
his sources. Moreover, all sciences are tied to their methods.
In this way, and in no other way, the theologian, too, is
tied to the facts given him by Revelation, and to his method.
Every science has its own method. The astronomer gains
his facts by observation and calculation, the mathematician
arrives at his facts by calculation and study; the historian,
by human testimony; the theologian, however, by divine testimony,
at least as to fundamental truths. That they are transmitted
to him not by his personal study, but by external testimony,
does not matter; the historian too draws from such
sources. Nor can theological knowledge be less certain because
vouched for by divine authority: it makes it the more certain.
Or is there no divine authority, and can there be none? This is
exactly the silent presumption, which is the basis of the charge
against theology. But where is the proof for it? It can only
be demonstrated by denying the existence of a supermundane
God; for, if there is an Almighty God, there can be no doubt
that He can give a Revelation and demand belief.
</p>

<p>
Perhaps it may be said further, the theologian is not permitted
to doubt his doctrines, hence he is prohibited from
examining them; he surely cannot be <emph>unprepossessed</emph>.
</p>

<p>
We can refer to what we have previously said. Unprepossession
demands but one thing, namely, not to assume something
as true and certain that is false or unproved; it demands
strong proofs for anything that needs proof. We may
safely assert that there is no other science more exacting in this
<pb n='388'/><anchor id='Pg388'/>
respect than Catholic theology, both of the present and of the
past. It has not a single position that is not incessantly tested
by attacks as to its tenability. Any one not unacquainted with
theology, who knows the works of <hi rend='italic'>St. Thomas</hi> and of the later
theologians, with their exact methods of thinking, who observes
the conscientious work in Catholic biblical-exegetic, historical-critical
field, must be convinced of the serious atmosphere of
truth prevailing here. Unprepossession does not demand to
doubt, time and again, that which has been positively proved, to
rediscover it by new research. Positive facts are no longer a
subject for research; in their case research has fully achieved
its end. Methodical doubt, proper in scientific examination, is
proper also in regard to religious truths.
</p>

<p>
Furthermore, the latitude of the theologian is much larger
than presumed by those who derive their information solely
from modern assertions about dogmatic bondage. One may
safely assert that the freedom of movement of the mathematician
is more limited by his principles, his train of thought more
sharply prescribed, than is the case with the theologian. Of
course the theologian is bound by everything he finds infallibly
established directly by revelation and by the authority of the
Church; or indirectly by the concurring teaching of the
Fathers or the theologians; he is bound also by non-infallible
decisions, especially those of congregations, though not absolutely
and not irrevocably.
</p>

<p>
But this is only the smaller part of his province. In many
departments, like the one of ecclesiastical history, there are
almost no restrictions to his research, except those imposed by
historical facts. Canon law and similar departments dealing
with the laws of the Church, coincide in method and liberty
of research with the profane science of law. Of all departments
of theology, the dogmatical is the one most affected by
the authority of faith. Yet even here a great deal is left to
unhampered work. Many a void has to be filled, many a
question solved, which the theology of the past has never taken
up; even the defined truths still offer a large scope for personal
work, in regard to demonstration, or to the philosophic-speculative
penetration of the dogmas and their interpretation.
</p>

<pb n='389'/><anchor id='Pg389'/>

<p>
As a fact, the reader of theological literature, both old and
new, will, in a multitude of cases, meet with unrestrained
individuality.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Ecclesiastical Supervision of Teaching.</head>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Encyclica</hi> against Modernism (September 8, 1907)
gave rise to fears that any free movement would henceforth
be impossible for Catholic theology. These fears referred
chiefly to the disciplinary measures, prescribed by the Encyclical
for the purpose of supervising theological teaching in each
diocese. Then came the papal Motu Proprio, of September 1,
1910, which, among other things, required the teacher of theology
to confirm by oath his confession of the Creed and his
intention to repudiate modernistic errors. Since then many a
complaint has been heard about espionage and coercion. Similar
complaint, about an imminent debasement of the Church,
has been raised whenever important measures in the discipline
of the Catholic Church were published, and they emanated primarily
from the camp of the enemy.
</p>

<p>
It is not to be denied, however, that such an energetic call
for watchfulness and action, issued from the highest ecclesiastical
watchtower, like the one referred to, may lead in some
cases to anxiety and false suspicions. This is no doubt regrettable;
but it is an incident common to human legislation and
will surprise no one who has any experience of life. A glance
at these decrees will show that they are nothing more than
an urgent injunction, and the exercise of that supervision
of religious life and teaching which pertains to the authority
of the Catholic Church, and which has been practised by her
at all times. The language is urgent, it has a severity which
is softened in the execution. Its explanation lies in the eminent
danger of the modernistic movement to the continuance
of Catholic life. Modernism, as described and condemned by
the Encyclica, is nothing less than the absolute destruction of
the Catholic faith, and of Christianity.
</p>

<p>
The Protestant theologian, Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Tröltsch</hi>, wrote after the
publication of the Encyclica: <q>As viewed from the position of
<pb n='390'/><anchor id='Pg390'/>
curialism and of the strict Catholic dogma, there existed a real
danger. Catholicism had gotten into a state of inner fermentation,
corresponding to the same condition caused by modern
theology within the Protestant churches.</q>
</p>

<p>
The danger of Modernism is often enhanced by a deceptive
semblance of the right faith, and by the pretence to urge only
the righteous interests of modern progress against obsolete forms
of thought and life, now and then also by its secret propaganda.
Hence this intervention by a firm hand, and this only after
having waited a long time. They were measures of prevention,
like those taken to stave off a serious danger; the tidal wave
receding, their urgency disappears automatically.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The German bishops stated in their pastoral letter of December 10,
1907, that in some Catholic lay-circles there was uneasiness about the
Encyclical, fearing that it might endanger scientific endeavour and
independence in thought and research, and that the Church intended
to prohibit or render impossible co-operation in solving the problems of
civilization. <q>May they all recognize,</q> they said, <q>how groundless such
fears are! The Church desires to set bars only to one kind of freedom&mdash;the
freedom to err.</q> If the rules and precepts of the Church do sound
harsh sometimes, it is because the Church adheres unconditionally to
the principle: The truth above all. <q>The Church has at no time opposed
the true progress of civilization, but only that which hinders its
progress: heedlessness, haste, the mania for innovation, the morbid
aversion against the truth that comes from God. But we Catholic Christians
can join free and unhampered, with all our strength and talent,
in the peaceful strife of noble, intellectual work and genuine mental
education.</q>
</p>

<p>
The fears of too great a pressure by the ecclesiastical authorities
have been given trenchant expression in most recent times by a man
who, while standing outside of the Catholic Church, has always shown
himself well disposed towards it, namely, the noted pedagogue, <hi rend='italic'>Fr. W.
Förster</hi> of Zurich. <hi rend='italic'>Förster</hi> has won merit and distinction by his
manly and spirited defence of the Christian view in pedagogical science
and mental culture. In the book referred to he again describes
urgently the worthlessness and fatality of modern individualism, that
knows a good deal about freedom but nothing of self-discipline, nor
of authority or tradition, and which represents most superficial amateurism
in the domain of religion and morals. Then he turns to
criticize Church practice; and his criticism becomes a sharp accusation.
His main charge is <q>fatal restraint of the spirit of universality.</q>
<q>Some groups in the Church,</q> he asserts, <q>of mediocre learning, have
established a clique rule, under which the others, the more creative and
intensive souls, become the victims of intolerance, espionage, and false
suspicion</q>; <q>universality, which unites the different mental tendencies,
<pb n='391'/><anchor id='Pg391'/>
has given way to separation</q>; <q>everywhere a one-sided denunciatory
information of the leading circles by accidentally ruling groups and
factions; anxious intolerance for everything unusual, disciplinary
austerity and unintelligent pedantry, individualistic and unchristian
spirit of distrust and mutual espionage</q>; <q>levelling of the mental
life</q>; <q>one is tired,</q> we are told, <q>of the spirit of incessant disciplining</q>;
<q>of the invariable cold and disdainful forbidding and repression.</q>
In the Middle Ages and earlier times it was different;
then <q>universality was the ruling spirit, the working of the many into
a unit full of life; this policy was changed for no other reason than
because of the struggle of the Church against Protestantism.</q> <q>The
greatest harm that Catholicism suffered by the great rupture of the
sixteenth century is most likely seen in the tendency of the Church
to view thenceforth religious freedom within Catholic Christianity
with an anxious, even hostile eye.</q>
</p>

<p>
Readers of the literature of the day will recognize here views
often met with during the last years, and the same excited note, which
is quite in contrast to the even temper that ordinarily characterizes
<hi rend='italic'>Förster's</hi> books. But what the reader will not find stated are the proofs
for these enormous accusations.
</p>

<p>
Undeniably, things have happened in the wide range of ecclesiastical
authority that cannot be approved. But where are the facts that
would justify charges of such sweeping nature? A Protestant author
can hardly be presumed to possess such a direct and positive insight
into the ecclesiastical practice of the higher and the highest order, to
give convincing strength to his bare assertion. Or is the number of
dissatisfied voices that make these charges sufficient proof in itself?
If the ecclesiastical authority be allowed, now and then, to emerge from
its passiveness to take measures against dangerous doctrinal tendencies,
is it not to be expected, as a matter of course, that some
minds become disgruntled and complain about oppression and clique
rule? Or must that right be denied the Church altogether? <hi rend='italic'>Förster</hi>
says himself: <q>The spirit of dignity and responsibility has never ruled
all parts of the hierarchy in the same measure as now, and rarely
if ever were there found in its leading circles so many men leading an
almost holy life as at present.</q> And yet we are asked to believe
that it was reserved exactly for this worthy hierarchy, and for these
saintly men, to forget the traditions of the Church in the most irresponsible
manner. One will have to say: <q>If <hi rend='italic'>Förster</hi> would examine
without bias the situation and apply consistently in respect to
authority the principles that he himself defends, he would be convinced
that the Church could not have acted any differently than it
did in regard to the regrettable events of the last years, and that
it has ever been the aim of the Church, before the sixteenth century
as after, to guard carefully the purity of traditions of faith against
any attack</q> (Prof. <hi rend='italic'>G. Reinhold</hi> in a review of <hi rend='italic'>Förster's</hi> book).
</p>

<p>
The Church has never known a universality that did not oppose
doctrinal errors. The Middle Ages did not know it; one need only
read the many condemnations from Nicholas I. to Innocent VIII.;
nor was such a universality known to the great Councils of ancient
<pb n='392'/><anchor id='Pg392'/>
Christianity up to the Nicæan, which hurled its anathema against
numerous teachings that opposed no dogmas defined at that time;
nor did the Holy Fathers know such a universality, nor the Apostles,
with their strict admonitions of unity of faith. The reply is made,
the <q>Church must not yield the least of its fundamental truths,</q> that
<q>its centralizing power ought to remain within the region of the
most essential</q>; whereas she actually exercises it in the domain of the
incidental. The ecclesiastical supervision of teaching has never limited
itself to the most essential, nor would this practice ever accomplish
the object to preserve pure the doctrine of faith. Furthermore, what
is the <q>most essential</q> what is the <q>incidental</q>? <hi rend='italic'>Förster's</hi> book
does not inform us about this most important question. The views
against which the Church has made front in the last years, do they
relate only to the incidental? Does this apply to the doctrines of a
<hi rend='italic'>Rosmini</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Lamennais</hi>, who are referred to in passing? No well-informed
theologian will assert this.
</p>

<p>
We shall hardly be wrong in assuming that the charge of overstraining
the ecclesiastical authority is based upon a presumption of a
philosophical nature, which is in evidence in several other passages of
the book&mdash;on the view, namely, that in religion the intellectual moment
should recede before the mystical, before anticipation and inner
experience. Hence the severe censure of <q>the narrow autocracy
of the intellectual interpretation</q> against the <q>preponderance of the
intellectual contemplation</q> in the Church, which is said to have
become so prevalent as to exert unavoidably a paralyzing effect
upon the entire religious life. Here we have the result of the notion
that theory of life, religion, and faith, depend but little on rational
knowledge. This notion is also in accord with the argument about
the impossibility of an independent scientific ethics. We have discussed
this elsewhere. We demonstrated that religion and faith relate to
positive truths that can be realized, and that can therefore be accurately
defined; they must be so defined. Of course this realization
need not be a scientific one, it can be of the natural kind that is
not clearly conscious of its reasons. <hi rend='italic'>Förster</hi>, too, touches upon this
important distinction when quoting <hi rend='italic'>Saitschick</hi>: <q>The inner perception
overtowers feeling and logical reason&mdash;here, too, lies the source of
a light shining brighter, stronger, and incomparably more true than
any light of reason</q>; and again, when his advice is, to foster to a
greater extent the <q>inner perception.</q> What is felt here vaguely
has long since been expressed much more lucidly in Christian philosophy.
</p>

<p>
Certainly a view that fails to lay, first of all, absolute stress on the
protection of the <emph>doctrine</emph> of faith cannot understand the Catholic point
of view; it will assume only too easily that the supervision relates to
incidentals. It will also engender a criticism against which the Church
may rightly protest, because it starts from presumptions that do not
apply to the Church.
</p>

<p>
No one will be astonished to find a Protestant author lacking the
clarified conception of the supernatural character of the Church that is
possessed by the Catholic; to see him view the Church almost invariably
in the light of a human organization, similar to the Protestant
<pb n='393'/><anchor id='Pg393'/>
denominations which he may cite before the court of his individual reason
and force to bow under the yoke of his criticism. The Catholic has
a better understanding of the words: <q>I am with you all days, even
unto the consummation of the world.</q> There will be foreign to his
mind the idea that the Church has since the days of Reformation, for
now nearly four centuries, deviated from the right way, and degenerated
more and more to a separatistic and insignificant community; a
church able to forget its traditions to the extent of grossly misconceiving
its proper sphere of authority, and fettering itself in a
narrow spirit to incidentals, could not keep his confidence any longer.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>The Oath Against Modernism.</head>

<p>
The <hi rend='italic'>Motu Proprio</hi> of September 1, 1910, decreed that
teachers of theology, and also Catholic priests generally, had to
bind themselves by oath to reject modernistic heresies, and to
accept obediently the ecclesiastical precepts. Dispensed from
this pledge were only the professors of theology at state institutions,
to spare them difficulties with state authorities.
</p>

<p>
This anti-modernist oath at once became the signal for a
storm of indignation, than which there has been hardly a greater
one since the days of the Vatican Council. A cry was raised
for freedom of science, for the exclusion of theological faculties,
even for another <q>Kulturkampf.</q> The General Convention
of German college professors, held at Leipzig January 7,
1911, issued a declaration to the effect that <q>All those who
have taken the anti-modernist oath have thereby expressed their
renunciation of an independent recognition of truth and of the
exercise of their scientific conviction, hence they have forfeited
all claim to be considered independent scientists.</q> Interpellations
were made in legislative bodies, it was demanded
that the option of taking the oath should be taken away from
university professors, because <q>the dignity of the universities
would be lowered if their members had the opportunity to
bind themselves by such an oath.</q>
</p>

<p>
Even threats were made by statesmen, hinting at reprisals by
the state, because its interests were being jeopardized, while, on
the other hand, there were those who declared: <q>If the Catholic
Church thinks it necessary for her ecclesiastical and religious
interests to put her servants under oath, it is her own business;
<pb n='394'/><anchor id='Pg394'/>
neither the state nor the Evangelical Church have a right to
interfere</q> (Prime Minister <hi rend='italic'>Bethmann-Hollweg</hi>, in the Prussian
Diet, on March 7, 1911).
</p>

<p>
The agitation of the minds will soon subside, as on former
occasions of this kind; and, with calm restored, people will
find, as <hi rend='italic'>J. G. Fichte</hi> told the impulsive <hi rend='italic'>F. Nicolai</hi>, one hundred
and thirty years ago, that the fact has only just been discovered
that the Catholics are Catholic.
</p>

<p>
Yes, indeed, the Catholics are Catholic, and desire to remain
Catholic&mdash;this and nothing else is the gist of the anti-modernist
oath. It does not oblige to anything else but what was believed
and adhered to before. It obliges to accept the doctrines of
faith; but they are the old truths of the Catholic Church, propounded
and believed at all times, and the necessary inferences
from them. Even the proposition that truths of faith can never
be contradicted by the results of historical research, or by human
science in general, is as old as faith itself. In addition, the
oath avows obedient submission to Church precepts; but this
has been demanded for centuries by the <hi rend='italic'>professio fidei Tridentina</hi>,
a pledge by oath to which every professor of theology
has been before obliged: <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Apostolicas et ecclesiasticas traditiones
reliquasque eiusdem Ecclesiae observationes et constitutiones
firmissime admitto et amplector</foreign>. This was the opinion of all competent
judges on this theological question. <q>We are convinced,</q>
declared correctly a prominent theological institution, <q>that
there is not assumed by this oath any obligation new in subject,
and no obligation not already existing. The oath is but the affirmation
of a duty already imposed by conscience</q> (the professors
of Theology of Paderborn, December 12, 1910). The Breslau
faculty said, in the same sense: <q>The faculty does not see in
the so-called anti-modernist oath any new obligation, nor one
exceeding the rule of faith ever adhered to by the faculty.</q>
And this declaration was fully approved of by Rome.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Cardinal <hi rend='italic'>Kopp</hi>, at the session of the German Upper House on
April 7, 1911, commented on these statements as follows: <q>Against
the opinions of these circles (having a different opinion of the oath)
I set the testimony and the statement of the most competent people,
to wit, the professors of university faculties and also those at episcopal
seminaries. Those who have taken the oath, as well as those
<pb n='395'/><anchor id='Pg395'/>
who have refrained from it by the privilege granted them by the Holy
See, they both declare positively that the oath does not contain any
new obligations, nor does it impose new duties on them; hence that,
on the contrary, they are not impeded in the pursuit of their tasks as
teachers and of their scientific work of research. Now, gentlemen, I
do not think it would be proper to insinuate that these earnest men,
appointed by the Government, or at least in office by its consent, would
make this declaration against their conviction and not in full
sincerity.</q>
</p>

</quote>

<p>
No wonder, therefore, that of the hundreds of thousands of
Catholic priests hardly a handful have refused the oath.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Nor is there anything new in the obligation to swear and subscribe
in writing to a confession of creed. Very often in the course of the
centuries decrees of creed and symbols had to be subscribed to in
writing. In the days of Jansenism, when priests were required to
swear to and sign a statement, many Jansenists tried to dodge this
oath, and the Jansenist <hi rend='italic'>Racine</hi> complained that this demand was unheard-of
in the Church. Thereupon the learned theologian <hi rend='italic'>Tournely</hi>
and others cited a number of examples of this kind from the history
of the Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Therefore the anti-modernist oath has not created anything
new. Consequently it has not changed anything in regard
to the freedom of theological research. It is the same as before;
nor has the oath changed anything in the quality of theological
professors, they merely promise to be what they must be
anyway; nor can, for instance, the oath induce the Catholic
priest, in teaching profane history, to present the history
of the Reformation in a different light than before, and thus
render him unfit to teach history; the oath has created
no new, confessional differences, hence has given no justified
cause for excitement&mdash;provided one has the needed theological
comprehension of the oath. If one has not this insight, and
will not trust to information from a competent source, then
it will be the act of prudence to leave the test to the future;
and we can await this test serenely.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
We referred above to the declaration of German college teachers,
to the effect that all who have taken the oath have thereby expressed
their renunciation of independent cognition of truth. These stereotyped
ideas we have so often heard, with the same haziness and inconsistency.
<q>Because they have thereby expressed the renunciation
of independent cognition of the truth,</q> namely, by the acceptance
of certain doctrines. But is not every one who clings to his Christian
<pb n='396'/><anchor id='Pg396'/>
belief bound by this very fact to certain doctrines? Does every one who
still prays his Credo express the renunciation of his independence? If
the argument quoted is to mean anything at all, it means the full
rejection of all Christian duty to believe; indeed, this is the real
sense of this <q>independent recognition of truth,</q> as we have already
seen. But cannot some one, because of his conviction, renounce this
independence and believe, and in this conviction accept the doctrines
of the Church? If this conviction is his, and he affirms it by oath,
how can any one see in this oath a want of freedom, nay, a renunciation
of truth? If an atheist solemnly declared his intention to be
and to remain an atheist, he would hardly be accused of lack of
character by the advocates of modern freedom of thought. The judge,
the military officer, the member of a legislature, the professor, who must
all take the oath of allegiance,&mdash;all of these will have to be protected
against the insinuation of disloyalty to truth. If a man affirms by
oath his unalterable Catholic faith, he is without any hesitation
accused of untruthfulness. The government has been urged to forbid
this spontaneous exercise of Catholic sentiment. The inconsistency of
modern catch-phrases can hardly be given more drastic expression.
In order to guard the freedom of thought the government is to forbid
one from pledging himself to his own principles; in order to remain
an independent thinker a man must be forced by penal statute to
confess unconditionally the brand of free science prescribed by a
certain school and by no means have an opinion of his own; in order
to be free in his research the teacher in theology must be tied to the
catch-phrases of liberal philosophy. This is modern freedom, a
hybrid of freedom and bondage, of sophistry and contradiction, of
arrogance and barrenness of thought, which will exert its rule over
the minds as long as they are guided by half-thinking.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Bonds of Love, not of Servitude.</head>

<p>
People to whose mind Catholic thinking is foreign will never
be able to appreciate the energetic activity of the Church
authority.
</p>

<p>
On close examination, however, they will not deny that, <emph>if</emph>
the Christian treasure of faith is to be preserved undiminished,
<emph>if</emph> in the hopeless confusion and the unsteady vacillation of
opinions in our days there is to be left anywhere a safe place for
truth and unity of faith, this cannot be accomplished otherwise
than in the shape of a strong authority that has the
assurance of the aid of God.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The Catholic theologian may be permitted to point in exemplifying
this fact to the recent history of Protestantism and of its theology.
Protestantism does not acknowledge a teaching authority: its theology
<pb n='397'/><anchor id='Pg397'/>
demands complete freedom of research and teaching, making the most
extensive use of both. The result is the demoralization of the Christian
faith, which is speeding with frightfully accelerated steps to total
annihilation. The very danger which Modernism threatened to carry
into the Catholic Church has overwhelmed Protestant theology: the
metaphysical ideas of a modern philosophy penetrated it without
check, and killed its Christian substance. The measures against Modernism
were sharply criticized by many Protestants who, at the same
time, laid stress upon the fact that nothing of the sort could happen
among themselves. Indeed it could not, at least not consistently with
Protestant principle. But there is not a single fact in all history
which demonstrates more clearly the necessity of the Catholic authority
of faith, than just the condition of Protestantism at the present time.
On the part of believing Protestants this is admitted, if not expressly,
then at least in practice. To stem the destructive work of liberal
theology they resort to authority; invoke Evangelical formulas of
confession, the traditional doctrine, sometimes even the aid of the
state; neological preachers are disciplined by censures, even by dismissal,
against the loud protest of the liberals. Such action is easily
understandable; one cannot hear without sadness the cry for help
of pious Protestantism, a cry that grows more desperate every day;
one cannot help regretting its forlorn situation in view of the millions
of souls whose salvation is jeopardized, who are in danger of
being despoiled of the last remains of their Christian faith. Yet it
must be admitted that this cry for authority and obedience signifies
the abandoning of the Protestant principle, and the involuntary imitation
and therefore acknowledgment of the Catholic principle&mdash;for
the Catholic an incentive to cleave the more closely to his Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Many to whom the Catholic way of thinking is foreign, look
upon the duty of obedience which ties the Catholic to his
Church as a sort of servitude; to the Catholic it is the tie of
love, uniting free people to a sacred authority. Many look
upon the Church of Rome as a tyrannical curia, where Umbrian
prelates are cracking their whips over millions of servile and
ignorant souls; to the Catholic the Church is the divinely appointed
institution of truth, that possesses his fullest confidence.
He knows that history has given the most magnificent justification
to the Catholic principle of authority. Opinions have
come and gone, systems were born and have died, thrones
of learning rose and fell; only one towering mental structure
remained standing upon the rock of God-founded authority in
the vast field of ruins with its wrecks of human wisdom. And
its ancient Credo, prayed by all nations, is the same Credo once
prayed by the martyrs.
</p>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='398'/><anchor id='Pg398'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Chapter II. Theology And University.</head>

<p>
<q>He is not for our turn, and he is contrary to our
doings</q>; thus spoke in bygone ages the children of
this world. <q>Let us therefore lie in wait for the just....
He boasteth that he hath the knowledge of God and calleth
himself the Son of God</q> (Wisdom ii, 12 <hi rend='italic'>seq.</hi>). Centuries
later the children of the world treated in the same manner
God's Son and His doctrine. And in these days, when the
science of the faith is to be driven from the rooms of the
school, let us recall that in olden times the children of the
world planned similarly.
</p>

<p>
In the days when the private and public life of Europe's
nations was permeated with the Christian faith, and their ideas
were still centred in God and eternity, then the science of
the faith was held to be the highest among the sciences, not only
by rank but in fact.
</p>

<p>
And when, in the budding desire for knowledge, they erected
universities, the first and largest of them, Paris University,
was to be the pre-eminent home of theology, and wherever theology
joined with the other sciences it received first honours. Thus
it was in the days of yore, and for a long time. The secular tendency
of modern thought led to the gradual emancipation of science
from religion; unavoidably, its aversion for a supernatural
view of the world soon turned against, and demanded the removal
of, the science representing that view. Reasons for the
demand were soon found. Thus the removal of theology from
the university has become part and parcel of the system of ideas
of the unbelieving modern man; the liberal press exploits the
idea whenever occasion offers. Resolutions to this effect are introduced
in parliaments and diets, meetings of young students
<pb n='399'/><anchor id='Pg399'/>
are echoing the ideas heard elsewhere. No wonder that the Portuguese
revolution of 1910 had nothing more urgent to do than
to close the theological faculty at Portugal's only university.
</p>

<p>
What are the <emph>reasons</emph> advanced? Many are advanced; the
main reason is usually disguised; we shall treat of it when concluding.
In the first place we are again met by the old tune
of free science, which has been in our ears so long; the rooms
of the colleges, it is said, are destined for a research which seeks
truth with an undimmed eye, and not for blindfolded science
confined to a prescribed path.
</p>

<p>
No need to waste words on this. Just one more reference
may be permitted us, namely, to the study of law. There is
hardly another science with less latitude than the science of law.
Its task is not to doubt the justification of state laws, but to
look upon constitutions and statutes as established, to explain
them, and by doing so to train efficient officials and administrators
of the law. When explaining the civil code the teacher of
law has small opportunity for pursuing <q>free search after
truth</q>; neither will his pupil be tested at examinations in the
maxims of a free research that accepts no tradition; he will
have to prove his knowledge of the matter that had been given
to him. Yet no one has ever objected to the teaching of jurisprudence
at the university. Therefore the objection cannot be
valid that theology is restricted to the established doctrines of
its religion and has to transmit them without change to its
future servants. It should be borne in mind that our universities
are not intended for research only, but also, and chiefly, for
training candidates for the professions.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
This disposes at the same time of the objection that theology has
to serve ecclesiastical purposes outside of and foreign to science. Religious
science, like any other science, serves the desire that strives for
truth. True, it serves also for the practical training of the clergyman
for his vocation. But shall we eliminate from science the interests of
practical life? Then medicine and legal science would also have to
be excluded, and for these there would be planted only sterile theories,
and the universities transformed into a place of abstract intellectualism.
</p>

<p>
Again it is argued that religion and faith are not really cognition
and knowledge, but only the products of sentiment, and hence theology
has no claim to a place among the sciences; that religion can
only be a subject for psychology which lays bare its roots in the human
<pb n='400'/><anchor id='Pg400'/>
heart, and a subject for the history of religion, to trace its historical
forms and to study its laws of evolution&mdash;sciences which belong to the
philosophical faculty.
</p>

<p>
Thus we come back to the principles of an erroneous theory
of knowledge. No need to demonstrate again that the Christian belief
is built upon the clear perception of reason, and that it is not a sentimental
but a rational function.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
But has not the Church her theological seminaries? Let
theology seek refuge there! We answer the Church herself desires
this; she does not like theological faculties, they are in her
eyes a danger to the faith.
</p>

<p>
Now, <emph>if</emph> the Church would be deprived of her authoritative
influence upon the appointment of professors at theological
faculties and upon the subject of their teachings, consequently,
<emph>if</emph> there would be jeopardized the purity of belief of the candidates
for priesthood, and through them of the people, then, we
admit, the Church would rather forego theological faculties at
state-universities. This could not be done without considerable
injury to the public prestige of the Church, to her contact with
worldly sciences and their representatives and disciples, even to
the scientific study of theology. In the latter particularly by
the loss of the greater resources of the state, and by the absence
of inducement to scientific aim, which is more urgent for theologians
than for others at college. Neither would the state
escape injury, because of the open slight and harm to religion,
and of lessening its contact with the most influential body
in Christian countries. But if the Church is assured of her
proper influence on the faculties, she has no reason for an unfriendly
attitude toward them. The object the Church seeks to
achieve in her seminaries is the clerical education of her candidates,
their ascetic training, the introduction into a life of recollection
and prayer, into an order of life befitting priests; this
cannot be sufficiently done in the free life at the university.
</p>

<p>
This is not a bar to scientific instruction by the theological
faculty. Seminary and faculty supplement one another. We
see very frequently, at Rome and outside of Rome, the theological
school separated from the seminary with the approval of
the Church. But all these objections do not give the real reason,
the roots lie deeper.
</p>

<pb n='401'/><anchor id='Pg401'/>

<p>
When the Divine Founder of our Religion stood before the
tribunal of Judea He said: <q>My kingdom is not of this world:
if my kingdom were of this world, servants would strive for me.</q>
This was the whole explanation of why He stood there accused.
The guardian of the doctrine of her Master may use these words
to explain the fact that, in the eyes of many, she stands to-day
accused and defamed. The mind of modern man has forsaken
the world of the Divine and Eternal; no longer is he a servant
of this kingdom. His ideals are not God and Heaven, but he
himself and this world; not the service of God, but human rights
and human dignity. This view of the world, which cannot
grasp the wisdom of Jesus Christ, and which takes offence at
the Cross, also takes offence at a science that confesses as the
loftiest ideal <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Jesum Christum, et hunc crucifixum</foreign>.
</p>

<p>
The real kernel of the question is: Does the Christian
religion in its entirety still serve the purpose of to-day&mdash;or
does it not? is it to remain with us, the religion wherein our
fathers found the gratification of their highest mental aims,
the religion that gave Europe its civilization and culture, that
created its superior mental life, and still rules it to this hour?
Or shall religion be expelled by a return to a heathendom which
Christianity had overthrown? <q>We do not want Him to rule
over us</q>&mdash;there is the real reason for the modern antipathy
to Catholic theology. Else, whence the excited demand for its
removal? Because it is superfluous? Even if this were the
fact, there is many a category of officials, the little need of
which can be demonstrated without difficulty, yet no one grows
excited about it; many expenditures by the state are rather
superfluous, yet there is no indignation. No, the matter at issue
is not so much the scientific character of theology, nor misgivings
about its progress or its freedom; the real question is
this:
</p>

<div>
<head>Do we Desire to Remain Christians?</head>

<p>
For <emph>if</emph> we still recognize the Christian religion as the standard
for our thought, <emph>if</emph> we are persuaded that it must remain the
foundation of our life, then there can be no doubt that its facts,
its truths, and standards of life require scientific presentation;
<pb n='402'/><anchor id='Pg402'/>
then it cannot be disputed that this science is entitled to a place
alongside of the science of law, of chemistry, or Indology. Indeed,
then it must assume the first place in the system of sciences.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Surely a science ranks the higher, the higher its object and its
sources, the surer its results, and the greater its significance for the
most exalted aim of mankind. The subject of theology is God and His
works, the ultimate causes of all things in God's eternal plan of the
universe, the <q>wisdom of God in a mystery, a wisdom which is hidden,
which God ordained before the world, unto our glory</q> (1 Cor. ii. 7).
Therefore it is wisdom; for <q>the science of things divine is science
proper</q> (Augustinus, De Trinit. xii, 14). A science, having as its
subject Greek architecture, geography, or physical law, may claim
respect, yet it must step back before a science of Religion, that rises
to the highest sphere of truth by a power of flight that participates in
the omniscience of the Holy Ghost; for such is the faith. For this
reason its results, in so far as they rest on faith, are more certain than
the results of all other sciences.
</p>

<p>
Finally, the aims of life which theology serves are not physical health
or advantages in the external life, but the knowledge of God, the spread
of His kingdom on earth, and the eternal goal of all human life.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
So long as the Christian religion is the valued possession of
the people of a country, and the roots of their lives rest more in
Christianity than in mathematics, astrophysics, or Egyptology,
so long is the science of religion entitled to a seat at the hearth
of the sciences; and the people, then, have the right to demand
that the servants of religion get their education at the place
where the other leading professions get their training. If the
state considers it its duty to train teachers of history and physics
for the benefit of its citizen, then it is still more its duty to help
in the education of the servants of religion, who are called upon
to care for more important interests of the people and state than
all the rest of the professions. Let us consider the task of universities.
As established in the countries of central Europe, they are
destined to foster science in the widest sense, and to educate the
leading professions: to be the hearth for the sum total of mental
endeavour, this is their vocation; hence all things that contain
truth and have educational value should join hands here. To
eliminate the science of the highest sphere of knowledge would be
tantamount to a mutilation of the university. Here all boughs
and branches of human knowledge should be united into a large
organism, of unity and community of work, of giving and taking
<pb n='403'/><anchor id='Pg403'/>
Theology needs for auxiliaries other sciences, such as profane
history and philology, Assyriology and Egyptology, psychology
and medicine. In turn it offers indispensable aid to history
and other branches of science, it guards the ethical and ideal
principles of every science, and crowns them by tendering to
them the most exalted thoughts. Here is the place of education
for the judge and official, for the physician and teacher; hence
it should be the place also for the education of the servant of
the chief spiritual power, religion.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
The university should unite all active mental powers that lift man
above the commonplace. But is there any stronger mental power than
religion?
</p>

<p>
It is the oldest and mightiest factor in mental life; it is as natural
to man as the flower is to the field; his mind gravitates to a religious
resting place, whence he may view time and eternity, where he may rest.
Therefore religion demands a science that inquires into its substance, its
justification, its effect on thought and life. Man strives to give to himself
an account of everything, but most of all of what is foremost in
his mind. A system of sciences without theology would be like an uncompleted
tower, like a body without a head.
</p>

<p>
The history of theology dates back to the very beginning of science and
culture. If we trace the oldest philosophy we find as its starting point
theological research and knowledge. <hi rend='italic'>Orpheus</hi> and <hi rend='italic'>Hesiod</hi>, who sang of
the gods, and the sages of the oldest mysteries, were called theologians;
<hi rend='italic'>Plutarch</hi> sees in the theologians of past ages the oldest philosophers, in
the philosophers, however, the descendants of the theologians; <hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>
derives philosophy from the teachers of theology. Even more prominently
was religious study and knowledge responsible for Hindoo, Chaldean,
and Egyptian philosophy.
</p>

<p>
Was it reserved for our age to discard all the better traditions of
mankind? Shall victory rest with the destructive elements in the mental
education of Europe? Against this danger to our ideal goods, theology
should stay at the universities, as a bulwark and permanent
protest.
</p>

</quote>

</div>

<div>
<head>Theological Faculty in State and Church.</head>

<p>
For this reason the theological faculty has a birth-right at
the university, whether state school or free university. Where
it is joined to a state university, theology automatically
becomes subordinate to the state, in a limited sense. More
essential is its dependency upon the Church, because, being the
science of the faith, theology is primarily subject to the authority
and supervision of the Church. For the Church, and only
<pb n='404'/><anchor id='Pg404'/>
the Church, is charged by its Divine Founder to teach His
religion to all nations. Hence no one can exercise the office of
a religious teacher, neither in the public school nor at college, if
not authorized to do so by the Church. It is a participation
in the ministry of the Church; and the latter alone can designate
its organs. Whoever has not been given by the Church
such license to teach, or he from whom she takes it away,
does not possess it; no other power can grant it, not even
the state. Nor can the state restore the license of teaching to
a theologian from whom the Church has withdrawn it; this
would be an act beyond state jurisdiction, hence invalid.
</p>

<p>
In granting the license to teach, the Church does so in the
self-evident presumption that the one so licensed will teach his
students the correct doctrine of the Church, as far as it has
been established; and he binds himself to do so by voluntarily
taking the office, and more explicitly by the profession of the
creed. If he should deviate from the creed later on, it is the
obvious right of the Church to cancel his license. In this
the Church only draws the logical conclusion from the office
of the teacher and from his voluntary obligation. He holds
his office as an organ of the Church, destined to lecture on
pure doctrine before future priests. Whether or not he has
honestly searched for the truth when deviating therefrom, this
he may settle with his conscience; but he is incapacitated to act
still further as an organ of the Church, and it is only common
honesty to resign his office if he cannot fulfil any longer the
obligations he assumed. The professor of theology is therefore
in the first place a deputy of his Church. Also he is teacher at
a state institution and as such a state official; he is appointed
by the state to be the teacher of students belonging to a
certain denomination, he is paid by the state, and may be
removed by the state from his position as official teacher. But
withal the right must not be denied to the Church to watch over
the correctness of the Christian doctrine, and to make appointment
and continuance in the teaching office dependent upon it.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>

<p>
Indeed, this demand was urged by Prof. <hi rend='italic'>Paulsen</hi>, notwithstanding
his entirely different position: he says: <q>The Catholic-theological
faculties are in a certain sense a concession by the Church to the
<pb n='405'/><anchor id='Pg405'/>
state; of course they are also a service of the state for the Church, and
a valuable one, too; but they rest in the first place upon a concession
made by the Church to the state, with a view to the historically established
fact, and to peace. Naturally, this concession cannot be unconditional.
The condition is: the professors appointed by the state
must stand upon ecclesiastical ground, they must acknowledge the doctrine
of the Church as the standard of their teaching, and they must
receive from the Church the <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>missio canonica</foreign>. The Church cannot accept
hostile scientists for teachers. Hence for the appointment an
agreement must be reached with ecclesiastical authority. The universities
are not merely workshops for research, they are at the same time
educational institutions for important public professions; in fact, they
were founded for this latter purpose: they are the outcome of the want
for scientifically educated clergymen, teachers, physicians, judges, and
other professionals. And this purpose necessitates restrictions: the
professor of Evangelical theology cannot teach arbitrary opinions any
more than his Catholic fellow-professor can; the lawyer is also restricted
by presumptions, for instance, that the civil code is not
an accumulation of nonsense, but, on the whole, a pretty good order
of life. Just as little as we should dispute the lawyer's standing as a
scientist on this account, so little shall we be able to deny this standing
to the Catholic theologian who stands with honest conviction on the
platform of his Church.</q> <q>We want the Catholic theological faculties
to be preserved; of course, under the presumption of freedom of scientific
research within the limits drawn by the creed of the Church.</q>
</p>

<p>
In a similar sense the Bavarian minister of education, Dr. <hi rend='italic'>V.
Wehner</hi>, said, on Feb. 11, 1908, in the course of a speech in the Bavarian
Diet: <q>Thus the Catholic professor of theology is bound to the standards
of creed and morals as established by the Church. The decision as
to whether a Catholic professor of theology teaches the right doctrine of
the Church is not for the state to give, but for the Church alone.</q>
<q>The business of the professors at theological faculties is to transmit
the teachings of the Church to future candidates for the priesthood,
and this is what they are employed for by the state. That the
Church does not tolerate a doctrine to differ from her own is to me
quite self-evident.</q> Hence we may conclude, <q>The attacks directed
here and there in recent times against the continuance of Catholic
theological faculties need not worry us in any way. Nor are they likely
to meet with response at the places where the decision rests. Times
have changed. Even non-Catholic governments are no longer blind to
the conviction that an educated clergy must be reckoned among the most
eminent factors for conserving the state</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Freiherr von Hertling</hi>).
Even during the heated debates on the anti-modernist oath in the Prussian
Diet and upper house, the importance of the theological faculties
was acknowledged by the speakers, none of whom demanded the removal
of these faculties, though outspoken in their criticism of the
oath. Prime minister <hi rend='italic'>Bethmann-Hollweg</hi> declared on March 7: <q>Catholic
students will get their training at the Catholic faculties the same
as hitherto, even after the anti-modernist oath is introduced. The state
never will claim for itself the authority to determine in any way
<pb n='406'/><anchor id='Pg406'/>
which, and in what, forms doctrines of faith shall be taught to Catholic
students. This is no affair of the state. If, and this is my wish, the
Catholic faculties will retain that value to teachers, students, and the
total organism of the universities, which is the natural condition of
their existence, then they will continue to exist for the profit of both,
the Catholic population and the state. Should they lose this value,
however, an event I do not wish to see, then they will die by themselves.
But I do not see that it is demanded by the interest of the state to
abolish without awaiting further development these faculties with one
stroke, thereby harming our Catholic population, whose wants and
needs deserve as much consideration as those of any other part of the
population.</q>
</p>

<p>
There is no warrant for the view that theology is subject to a foreign
power, and therefore it cannot claim a place in a state institution.
In its external relations the theological faculty is subject also to the
state, serving the public interests so much the better the more continually
the priest by his activity influences the life of the people. By the
way, why this urgent demand for state control in the pursuit of a science
by a party that otherwise is striving zealously to put the university
beyond the influence of the state? To be a state institution or not can
only be an extrinsic matter to the university itself. Or has the
science of medicine not enough intellectual substance and consistency
to thrive at a free university? Is science as such a matter of
state? Therefore, why find fault with theology because it will not be entirely
subordinated to the state? Nor is it proper to call the Church a
<q>foreign</q> power. It is certainly not a foreign power to theology;
neither to the Christian state, that has developed in closest relation to
the Church, which owes its civilization and culture to the Church,
shares with her its subjects, and is based even to-day upon the doctrines
and customs of the Church.
</p>

</quote>

<p>
Against Christ there arose the Jewish scribes and denounced
His wisdom as error; the scribes have passed away, we know
them no longer. To the Neoplatonics Christianity was ignorance,
even barbarity; Manicheans and Gnostics praised as
the higher wisdom Oriental and Greek philosophy adorned
with Christian ideas. They belong to history. When the people
of Israel came in touch with the brilliant civilization of Egypt,
Assyria, and Greece, they often became ashamed of the religion
of their forefathers, and embraced false gods; to-day we look
upon their fancy of inferiority as foolishness, and we rank their
religion high above the religious notions of the pagan Orient.
</p>

<p>
Thus has truth pursued its way through the centuries of
human history, often unrecognized by the children of men,
scolded for being obsolete, nay, more, driven from its home and
<pb n='407'/><anchor id='Pg407'/>
forced to make room for delusion and error. Delusion fled,
and error sank into its grave&mdash;but truth remained. Thus the
Church has endured, and thus the Church will live on, with her
doctrines and science misunderstood and repulsed by the children
of a world unable to grasp them; they will pass away and
so will their thoughts, yet the Church will remain, and so will
her science. <q>She was great and respected</q>&mdash;this is the
familiar quotation from a Protestant historian&mdash;<q>before the
Saxon had set foot on Britain, before the Frank had passed the
Rhine, when Grecian eloquence still nourished in Antioch, when
idols were still worshipped in the temple of Mecca. And she
may still exist in undiminished vigor when some traveller from
New Zealand shall, in the midst of a vast solitude, take his stand
on a broken arch of London Bridge to sketch the ruins of
St. Paul's</q> (<hi rend='italic'>Lord Macaulay</hi>).
</p>

<p>
Then, perhaps, another observer, leaning against the pillars
of history, and looking back upon the culture of this age, will
realize that only one power of truth may rightly say: <q>Heaven
and earth will pass away, but my words will not pass away</q>&mdash;Christ
and His Church.
</p>

</div>

<div>
<head>Law and Freedom. An Epilogue.</head>

<p>
The great Renovator of mankind, in whom the pious Christian
sees his God, and in whom the greater part of the modern
world, though turned from faith, still sees the ideal of a perfect
human being, hence also of true freedom, once spoke the significant
words: <q><foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et veritas liberabit vos</foreign>, and the truth shall make
you free</q> (John viii. 32). As all the words that fell from His
lips are the truth for all centuries to come, so are these words
pre-eminently true.
</p>

<p>
There is in our times a strong tension felt between freedom on
the one hand, and law and authority on the other; true freedom
and true worth it sees too exclusively in the independent assertion
of the self-will, and in the unrestrained manifestation of
one's strength and energy, while law and authority are looked
upon as onerous fetters. Our times do not understand that freedom
<pb n='408'/><anchor id='Pg408'/>
and human dignity are not opposed to law and obedience,
that no other freedom can be intended for man than the
voluntary compliance with the law and the standards of order.
</p>

<p>
All creatures, from the smallest to the largest, are bound by
law; none is destined for the eminent isolation of independence.
The same law of gravitation that causes the stone to fall, also
governs the giants of the skies, and they obey its rule; the
same laws that rule the candle-flame, that are at work in the
drop of water, also rule the fires of the sun and guide the
fates of the ocean. The heart, like all other organs of the human
body, is ruled by laws, and medical science, with its institutes and
methods, is kept busy to cure the consequences of the disturbance
of these laws. Every being has its laws: it must follow
them to attain perfection; deviation leads to degeneration.
</p>

<p>
Thus the decision of the worth and dignity of man does not
rest with an unrestrained display of strength, but with order;
not with unchecked activity, but with control of his acts and
with truth. The floods that break through the dam have force
and energy, but being without order they create destruction;
the avalanche crashing down the mountain side has force
and power, but, free from the law of order, it carries devastation;
glowing metal when led into the mould becomes a magnificent
bell, while flowing lava brings ruin. Only <emph>one</emph> dignity
and freedom can be destined for man, it consists in voluntarily
adhering to warranted laws and authorities.
</p>

<p>
For him who with conviction and free decision has made the
law of thought, faith, and action his own principle, the law has
ceased to be a yoke and a burden; it has become his own standard
of life, which he loves; it has become the fruit of his
conviction, <emph>truth</emph> has made him free. Ask the virtuoso who
obeys the rules of his art whether he considers them fetters;
indeed he does not, he has made them his principles. Let us
ask of the civilized citizen whether he feels the laws of civilization
to be a yoke; he does not, he obeys them of his own free
will, they are his own order of life. Unfree, slaves and serfs,
will be those only who carry with resentment the burden of the
laws they must obey. Unfree feels the savage people fighting
against the laws of civilization; unfree the wicked boy to whom
<pb n='409'/><anchor id='Pg409'/>
discipline is repugnant. It is not the law that makes man unfree,
it is his own lawlessness and rebellion.
</p>

<p>
Nor does submission to the God-given law of the Christian
belief make man low or unfree; to those to whom their belief
is conviction and life, the suggestion that they are oppressed
will sound strange. On the contrary, they feel that this belief
fits in harmoniously with the nobler impulses of their thought
and will, like the pearl in the shell, like the gem in its
setting. Man experiences this when his belief lifts him above the
lowlands of his sensual life to mental independence, and frees
him from the bondage of his own unruly impulses, that so often
seek to control him.
</p>

<quote rend='display'>
<lg>
<l>Freiheit sei der Zweck des Zwanges</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Wie man eine Rebe bindet,</l>
<l>Dass sie, statt im Staub zu kriechen,</l>
<l rend='margin-left: 2'>Frei sich in die Lüfte windet.</l>
</lg>
</quote>

<p>
(Freedom be the aim of restraint, just as the vine is tied to
the trellis that it may freely rise in the air, instead of crawling
in the dust.) This is the freedom of mind, knowing but one
yoke, the truth; the freedom that does not bow to error, nor to
high sounding phrases, nor to public opinion, nor to the bondage
of political life; neither is true freedom shackled by the
fetters of one's own lawless impulses. <foreign lang='la' rend='italic'>Et veritas liberabit
vos.</foreign>
</p>

</div>

</div>

</div>

<pb n='411'/><anchor id='Pg411'/>

<div rend='page-break-before: always'>
<index index='toc'/>
<index index='pdf'/>
<head>Index.</head>

<lg>
<l>Accusations of the Church, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Achievements of liberal research, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Adickes, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref>, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Agnosticism, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Amira, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ampère, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Anthropocentric view of the world, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Apponyi, A., Count</hi>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Arago</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Aristotle</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Arnest, Archbishop</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Atheism, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Augustine, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg080'>80</ref>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg260'>260</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Authority of Faith, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref>, <ref target='Pg112'>112</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; private, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Protestant, <ref target='Pg397'>397</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; rejection of, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autonomism, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autonomy of the College, <ref target='Pg360'>360</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Reason, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Teacher, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Autotheism, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bacon, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Baer, M. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Balmes, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Barrande</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Baumgarten, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Baur, F. Ch.</hi>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Beaumont, L. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bebel</hi>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Becker, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bellarmin, Cardinal</hi>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Benedict XIV.</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Berkeley</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bernouilli</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bertholon</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bertrin, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Berzelius, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bessel, F. W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bethmann-Hollweg</hi>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Bible-Criticism, modern, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Billroth, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Biot, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bischof, K. G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Boissarie, Dr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Boniface VIII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bornhak, C.</hi>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Boscovich</hi>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bourdaloue</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Bousset, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Boyle, Robert</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Brahe, Tycho de</hi>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Branco, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Brass, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Braun, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Brewster, D.</hi>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Broda, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Büchner</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Buckland, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Buffon, G. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cabet, Etienne</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cantor, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Caprivi</hi>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cardinals, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Carneri, B.</hi>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cassirer</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic, not free in research, <ref target='Pg108'>108</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Catholic Universities, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cauchy</hi>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Causation, Natural, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Certainty, scientific, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Censorship of Books, civil, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; ecclesiastical, <ref target='Pg171'>171</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Chamberlain, H. St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref>, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Charles Borromeo, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='412'/><anchor id='Pg412'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cherbury, Herbert of</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Chevreul, M. E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christ, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg143'>143</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg401'>401</ref>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Divinity denied, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christian Religion, State Protection for, <ref target='Pg352'>352</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Truths, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; View of the World, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Christianity, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; compared with Paganism, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; free, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Origin of, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; <hi rend='italic'>vs.</hi> Paganism, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; without Christ, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Church, the, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg070'>70</ref>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Accusations of the, <ref target='Pg142'>142</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Medical Science, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Catholic, alone enduring, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Episcopal, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; founder of Schools and Universities, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; not a foreign Power, <ref target='Pg406'>406</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the Mother of Civilization, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cicero</hi>, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref>, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Claar</hi>, M., <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Clement IV.</hi>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Clement V.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Clement VIII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cognition, human, <ref target='Pg034'>34</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>College Professors, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Columbus, Christopher</hi>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Communistic Experiments, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Congregations, Roman, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Copernican System, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Copernicus, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg113'>113</ref>, <ref target='Pg174'>174</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg200'>200</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Coppée, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Corneille</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cornu</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Cosmogonies, of Nations, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Council, Fourth Lateran, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Council, Vatican, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Craniotomy, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Creation, disputed, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Criticism of the Gospels, modern, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cuvier, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Cyril, St., of Alexandria</hi>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dalberg, J. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dana, J. Dwight</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Darwin</hi>, <ref target='Pg107'>107</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; an Agnostic, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Davy, Sir H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dawson, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dechristianizing of the modern State, <ref target='Pg362'>362</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Delitzsch, Fr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Deluc, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Denifle, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Denthofen</hi>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Descartes, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dilthey, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Divinity of Christ, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; denied, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dogmas, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg067'>67</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Döllinger</hi>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Draper, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg144'>144</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Drews, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Dualism, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Du Bois-Reymond</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dumas, J. B.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Dumont, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Economics, liberal, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Egger, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ehrenberg, Ch.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ehrenfels, Chr. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Eichhorn, Minister</hi>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Emancipation from the Truth, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Eméry</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Epinois, de l'</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Episcopal Church, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Erdmann, J. E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Error, Danger of Infection by, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; to be taught with same right as truth? <ref target='Pg328'>328</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Ethics, modern, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg330'>330</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Eucken, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Euler</hi>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Evolution, Theory of, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Theory, held by Catholic Scientists, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='413'/><anchor id='Pg413'/>

<lg>
<l>Faith, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and Reason, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Authority of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg081'>81</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Definition of, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Doubts forbidden, <ref target='Pg139'>139</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; its scientific Demonstration, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Motive of, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; not blind, <ref target='Pg061'>61</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Obedience of, and Freedom of Action, <ref target='Pg105'>105</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Falkenberg, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Faraday, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Favaro, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fénélon</hi>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Feuerbach, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fichte, J. G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fischer, Kuno</hi>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fizeau, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Foerster, F. W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fonck, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fonsegrive, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Forel, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref>, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Foucault, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fouillie, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Francé, R. H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Francis of Sales, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg175'>175</ref>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Franklin, B.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Frauenhofer</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Frederick II., King</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom, Definition of, <ref target='Pg008'>8</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; for the Truth, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; modern Idea of, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Art, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Research, different from Freedom of Teaching, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Research, liberal, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Science, Necessity, <ref target='Pg012'>12</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; Subject to human Nature, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of Teaching, as understood in the Past, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; Danger of, admitted by modern Scientists, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; Definition of, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; unrestricted, inadmissible, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freedom of Thought, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; two Kinds of, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Freemasons, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-religionists, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Free-thinkers, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref>, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref>, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fresnel, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Friedwald</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Frins, V.</hi>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Fuchs, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Galileo</hi>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg101'>101</ref>, <ref target='Pg102'>102</ref>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Galle, J. G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Galvani, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gassendi, P.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gauss, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref>, <ref target='Pg210'>210</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gebler, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Generatio aequivoca, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Genesis, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Doctrine of, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; History or Legend? <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; primordial, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gerdil</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gibbons, Cardinal</hi>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Giese, T.</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Giesebrecht, F. W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg032'>32</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg387'>387</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>God's Order of Life, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Goethe</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Goetz, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Gospels, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; modern Criticism of, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Government, founded on Christianity, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Goyau, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Grace, divine, Definition of, <ref target='Pg073'>73</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gray, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gregory VII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gregory IX.</hi>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gregory XI.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Grienberger</hi>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Grimaldi, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Grisar, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg197'>197</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Grosse, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Grotthuss, von</hi>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Guldin</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Gunkel, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Günther, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='414'/><anchor id='Pg414'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Häckel, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg087'>87</ref>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref>, <ref target='Pg303'>303</ref>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;&mdash; denounced for Forgery, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash;&mdash; on Lourdes, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Haeser</hi>, <ref target='Pg154'>154</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Haller, A. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Halley</hi>, E., <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hansen, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Harnack, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg265'>265</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hartmann, E. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref>, <ref target='Pg317'>317</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Harvard University, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Harvey, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hauy, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Heer, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hefele, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hegel</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Heis, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Helmholtz, H. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Henslow, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg216'>216</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Herbart</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hermes, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Herrmann, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Herschel</hi>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hertwig, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hertz</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hettner, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hilgers, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref>, <ref target='Pg176'>176</ref>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>His, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Historian, the Catholic, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>History, and the Faith, <ref target='Pg093'>93</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hitchcock</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hoensbroech, P.</hi>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hoff, van't</hi>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Holl, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Holtzmann, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Honorius III.</hi>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hörnes, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Huber, V. A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanists, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanitarian Religion, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; View of Life, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Humanity, emancipated, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Human race, Origin of, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Humboldt, A. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Humboldt, W. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg314'>314</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hume, D.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Huxley, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Huygens, Chr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg204'>204</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Hyrtl, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Illuminati, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Immorality, among College Men, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Inclinations, human, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Incompatibility of Science and Faith, <ref target='Pg198'>198</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Index of forbidden Books, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg169'>169</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Individualism, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Infallibility, <ref target='Pg076'>76</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Innocent IV.</hi>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Innocent VI.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>James, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg268'>268</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Janssen, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg149'>149</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesuit Order, <ref target='Pg183'>183</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jesus Christ, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Existence of, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; who was? <ref target='Pg281'>281</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Jews, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Joachim, G.</hi> (see <ref target='Index-Rheticus'><hi rend='italic'>Rheticus</hi></ref>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Jodl, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg123'>123</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>John XXII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Jones, Dr. Spencer</hi>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Jörgensen</hi>, <ref target='Pg229'>229</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Jülicher</hi>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Justin, Phil.</hi>, <ref target='Pg277'>277</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kahl, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kant, I.</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg063'>63</ref>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg132'>132</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref>, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg263'>263</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kaufmann, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg153'>153</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kelvin, Lord</hi> (see <ref target='Index-Thomson'><hi rend='italic'>Thomson</hi></ref>)</l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kepler, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg185'>185</ref>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Kepler-Bund, <ref target='Pg333'>333</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kirchhoff, G. R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kleinpeter, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kneller</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Knowledge and Faith, separation of, <ref target='Pg042'>42</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kochansky</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kohlbrugge, J. H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Köller</hi>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='415'/><anchor id='Pg415'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kollmann, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kone, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kromer, Bishop</hi>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Kues, N. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lacharpe</hi>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lalande</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lamarck, J. B. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lammenais, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lamont, J. von.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lange, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lapparent, A. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lateran Council, Fourth, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lavoisier, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Law, necessity of, <ref target='Pg408'>408</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Laws of nature, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lehmann, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lehmann, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Leibnitz, G. W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Leo, the Great</hi>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Leo XIII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lessing, G. F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Leverrier, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg048'>48</ref>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Liberalism, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref>, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>License to teach, ecclesiastical, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Liebig, J. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Liebmann, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Life, first, whence did it come, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Linné, Karl</hi>, <ref target='Pg205'>205</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lipps, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg135'>135</ref>, <ref target='Pg311'>311</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Locke, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Loisy, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Loosten, de</hi>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lossen</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lourdes, <ref target='Pg247'>247</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lüdeman</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Luther</hi>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Lutheran Church, expelled Kepler, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Lyell, Ch.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Macaulay</hi>, <ref target='Pg407'>407</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mach, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Macolano</hi>, <ref target='Pg187'>187</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mädler, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mai, Cardinal</hi>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man, Descent of, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; free, <ref target='Pg015'>15</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; his Destiny, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref>, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Member of Society, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man, the autonomous, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the transcendental, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Man's Emancipation, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Intellect, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Martius, von</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Masaryk, T. G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg160'>160</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Maxwell, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg214'>214</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mayer, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg215'>215</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Melanchthon</hi>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mendel, G. J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Menger, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Messer, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Method of modern Science, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Michael, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg182'>182</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Migné</hi>, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mill, Stuart</hi>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Miracles denied, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Modernism, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Oath against, <ref target='Pg393'>393</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Moigno</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Moleschott, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mommsen, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monism, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Definition of, <ref target='Pg244'>244</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Monists, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Montanari, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Morality, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; independent of Religion, <ref target='Pg250'>250</ref>, <ref target='Pg336'>336</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; no absolute Standard of, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Muckermann, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Müller, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Müller, Fr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Müller, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Münch, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg147'>147</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Muratori, L. A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg320'>320</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Mysticism</hi>, <ref target='Pg043'>43</ref>, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Nature, human, ignored, <ref target='Pg264'>264</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Newton</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref>, <ref target='Pg203'>203</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Nicolai, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Niebergall, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Nietzsche</hi>, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref>, <ref target='Pg037'>37</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg079'>79</ref>, <ref target='Pg270'>270</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oath against Modernism, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; binding? <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='416'/><anchor id='Pg416'/>

<lg>
<l>Oath of Allegiance in civil Professions, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Professio Fidei Tridentina, <ref target='Pg394'>394</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Objectivism, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Oken</hi>, <ref target='Pg178'>178</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Olbers, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Omalius, J. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Oppression, of mental Liberty, by Party Rule, <ref target='Pg366'>366</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Oresme, Bishop</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Osiander</hi>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ostwald, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Owen, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ozanam, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Paganism, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; extolled by modern Science, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; preferred to Christianity, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Palacky</hi>, <ref target='Pg146'>146</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pantheism, <ref target='Pg023'>23</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papacy, Importance of, <ref target='Pg373'>373</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Papal Charters of Universities, <ref target='Pg148'>148</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pascal</hi>, <ref target='Pg211'>211</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pasteur</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg222'>222</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pastor, L. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Patients, made Subjects for medical Experiments, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Paul III.</hi>, <ref target='Pg184'>184</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Paul IV.</hi>, <ref target='Pg170'>170</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Paulsen, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg040'>40</ref>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg064'>64</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref>, <ref target='Pg239'>239</ref>, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref>, <ref target='Pg253'>253</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg309'>309</ref>, <ref target='Pg312'>312</ref>, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref>, <ref target='Pg335'>335</ref>, <ref target='Pg338'>338</ref>, <ref target='Pg382'>382</ref>, <ref target='Pg404'>404</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Paulus, H. E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pedagogy, <ref target='Pg345'>345</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Perception, the Nature of human, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pesch, Chr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Peschel, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pessimism</hi>, <ref target='Pg295'>295</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pfaff, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pfleiderer, O.</hi>, <ref target='Pg256'>256</ref>, <ref target='Pg259'>259</ref>, <ref target='Pg285'>285</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Philip, the Fair</hi>, <ref target='Pg152'>152</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophical Errors, <ref target='Pg327'>327</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Training, great Want of, <ref target='Pg321'>321</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Philosophy and the Faith, <ref target='Pg092'>92</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Scholastic, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref>, <ref target='Pg053'>53</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Piazzi, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pindar</hi>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pius IX.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref>, <ref target='Pg165'>165</ref>, <ref target='Pg166'>166</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pius X.</hi>, <ref target='Pg099'>99</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Plate, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg206'>206</ref>, <ref target='Pg237'>237</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Plato</hi>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg269'>269</ref>, <ref target='Pg275'>275</ref>, <ref target='Pg337'>337</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Plutarch</hi>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Poggendorff</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pohle, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg209'>209</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Poincaré, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg114'>114</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Pope, his Person, <ref target='Pg098'>98</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Popes, and the Universities, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Prantl, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Prayer, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pressensé, F. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg299'>299</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Primordial Genesis, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Progress, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Promoting the Christian Faith, the Aim of Founders of Universities, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Protestantism, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg044'>44</ref>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg066'>66</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref>, <ref target='Pg097'>97</ref>, <ref target='Pg117'>117</ref>, <ref target='Pg128'>128</ref>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref>, <ref target='Pg168'>168</ref>, <ref target='Pg193'>193</ref>, <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg202'>202</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref>, <ref target='Pg390'>390</ref>, <ref target='Pg396'>396</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ptolemy</hi>, <ref target='Pg005'>5</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Pythagoras</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Quenstedt, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rade, M.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Radicalism, <ref target='Pg332'>332</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ramsay, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ranke, L. von.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ratzel, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reason, its Limitations, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Reformation, the, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Reimarus, H. S.</hi>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Reinhold, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg391'>391</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Reinke, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Relative Truth, <ref target='Pg157'>157</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religion, <ref target='Pg016'>16</ref>, <ref target='Pg020'>20</ref>, <ref target='Pg025'>25</ref>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; abandoned, <ref target='Pg289'>289</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; distinguished from Science, <ref target='Pg266'>266</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of natural Reason, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Religious Instruction of Children, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='417'/><anchor id='Pg417'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Remus, John</hi>, <ref target='Pg196'>196</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Renan, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Research, and Faith, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Definition of, <ref target='Pg009'>9</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Restraint, proper, of Science, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revelation, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg051'>51</ref>, <ref target='Pg072'>72</ref>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg297'>297</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Proof of, <ref target='Pg138'>138</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Revolution, French, <ref target='Pg029'>29</ref>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of 1848, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Rheticus'/>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rheticus</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>G. Joachim</hi>), <ref target='Pg195'>195</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rhodius</hi>, <ref target='Pg140'>140</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Riccioli, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg190'>190</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Right of Christians, to be represented, <ref target='Pg367'>367</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; to teach, natural, <ref target='Pg369'>369</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Rights of Teacher, not unrestricted, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ritter, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Romanes, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg221'>221</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Roscellin</hi>, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rosenberger</hi>, <ref target='Pg118'>118</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rosmini-Serbati</hi>, <ref target='Pg110'>110</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rothenbücher</hi>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rousseau, J. J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Rudder, P. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ruville, A. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg077'>77</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sabatier, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg039'>39</ref>, <ref target='Pg078'>78</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Saint-Hilaire</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Saitschick</hi>, <ref target='Pg392'>392</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sarcey</hi>, <ref target='Pg173'>173</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Savigny, F. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg355'>355</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scepticism, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg047'>47</ref>, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg293'>293</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schafhäutl, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Scheiner, Ch.</hi>, <ref target='Pg125'>125</ref>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schell, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg136'>136</ref>, <ref target='Pg172'>172</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schelling</hi>, <ref target='Pg004'>4</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Scherr, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg038'>38</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schiaparelli, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schiller</hi>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schleiermacher</hi>, <ref target='Pg045'>45</ref>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schmiedel, P.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schneider, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schönbein</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg218'>218</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schönberg, Cardinal</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Schools, free, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schopenhauer</hi>, <ref target='Pg035'>35</ref>, <ref target='Pg272'>272</ref>, <ref target='Pg274'>274</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schwann, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schwegler, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Schweitzer, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Science, an Activity of the human Mind, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; anti-Christian, its Danger, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Definition, <ref target='Pg003'>3</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Errors of, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; grave Charges against Modern, <ref target='Pg329'>329</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Limitations, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Power of, <ref target='Pg322'>322</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; restricted by accidental Conditions, <ref target='Pg361'>361</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; subject to God, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; subject to Imperfections of human Mind, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; subject to Truth, <ref target='Pg006'>6</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Vocation of, <ref target='Pg279'>279</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sciences, profane and the Faith, <ref target='Pg088'>88</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scientific Research, Methods, <ref target='Pg158'>158</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Teaching, Definition, <ref target='Pg316'>316</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scientists, Catholic, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Scripture, does not teach profane Sciences, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Interpretation, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Narratives not to be taken in literal Sense, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Secchi, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg191'>191</ref>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sedgwick, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg219'>219</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Seminaries, <ref target='Pg400'>400</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sensuality, Emancipation of, Danger to Civilization, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sexual Perversities, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Practice, natural, <ref target='Pg346'>346</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Questions, <ref target='Pg325'>325</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Reform, <ref target='Pg347'>347</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sham-Science, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Silence not Denial, <ref target='Pg011'>11</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Smet, de</hi>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Smith, Adam</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Smolko, S. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg359'>359</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socialism, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Socialists, <ref target='Pg331'>331</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Social question, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Sociology, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Socrates</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Soul, the, <ref target='Pg046'>46</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the, an illusion, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Spencer, H.</hi>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Spicker, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg026'>26</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref>, <ref target='Pg324'>324</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Spinoza, B.</hi>, <ref target='Pg041'>41</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Stägemann</hi>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='418'/><anchor id='Pg418'/>

<lg>
<l>State, the, and Freedom of Teaching, <ref target='Pg340'>340</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Steudel</hi>, <ref target='Pg236'>236</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Strauss, D. F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg054'>54</ref>, <ref target='Pg065'>65</ref>, <ref target='Pg240'>240</ref>, <ref target='Pg258'>258</ref>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref>, <ref target='Pg273'>273</ref>, <ref target='Pg280'>280</ref>, <ref target='Pg283'>283</ref>, <ref target='Pg286'>286</ref>, <ref target='Pg287'>287</ref>, <ref target='Pg315'>315</ref>, <ref target='Pg364'>364</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Stütz</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Subjectivism</hi>, <ref target='Pg033'>33</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supernatural, Factors to be excluded, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; the, inadmissible, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Supervision of Teaching, Ecclesiastical, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Sybel, L. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg292'>292</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Syllabus, the, <ref target='Pg055'>55</ref>, <ref target='Pg094'>94</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg162'>162</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Tanner, A., <ref target='Pg192'>192</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Targioni-Tozzetti</hi>, <ref target='Pg194'>194</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teachers, anti-Christian, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Catholic, small Number of, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Jewish, <ref target='Pg365'>365</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Teaching, Definition of, <ref target='Pg010'>10</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the Church, as distinguished from Opinions of Theologians, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Tews, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg358'>358</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thénard, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theocentric View of the World, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theologians, Catholic, of Repute, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theological Literature, Catholic, <ref target='Pg384'>384</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theology and Progress, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; a Science, <ref target='Pg378'>378</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; History of, <ref target='Pg403'>403</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theophobia of Science, <ref target='Pg234'>234</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Theory of Rights, individualistic, <ref target='Pg313'>313</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thomas, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg082'>82</ref>, <ref target='Pg084'>84</ref>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref>, <ref target='Pg262'>262</ref>, <ref target='Pg353'>353</ref>, <ref target='Pg388'>388</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thomasius, Chr.</hi>, <ref target='Pg344'>344</ref>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<anchor id='Index-Thomson'/>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Thomson</hi> (<hi rend='italic'>Lord Kelvin</hi>), <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg238'>238</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref>, <ref target='Pg251'>251</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg381'>381</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Toland, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Treitschke, H. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg129'>129</ref>, <ref target='Pg179'>179</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Tröltsch, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg134'>134</ref>, <ref target='Pg167'>167</ref>, <ref target='Pg298'>298</ref>, <ref target='Pg356'>356</ref>, <ref target='Pg389'>389</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Truth, relative, <ref target='Pg049'>49</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Tyndall, J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg217'>217</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Überweg, F.</hi>, <ref target='Pg267'>267</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Uhlich, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg291'>291</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>United States, <ref target='Pg111'>111</ref>, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Universities, <ref target='Pg150'>150</ref>, <ref target='Pg341'>341</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; and the Church, <ref target='Pg371'>371</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Catholic, <ref target='Pg370'>370</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; free, <ref target='Pg368'>368</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>University, and Theology, <ref target='Pg398'>398</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; Teachers, <ref target='Pg017'>17</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; vanishing Respect for, <ref target='Pg334'>334</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Unprepossession in Research, <ref target='Pg121'>121</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg357'>357</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Urban IV.</hi>, <ref target='Pg155'>155</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Urban V.</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Urban VIII.</hi>, <ref target='Pg096'>96</ref>, <ref target='Pg186'>186</ref>, <ref target='Pg189'>189</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vaillant</hi>, <hi rend='italic'>Anarchist</hi>, <ref target='Pg350'>350</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Valerius, Maximus</hi>, <ref target='Pg319'>319</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Varnhagen</hi>, <ref target='Pg036'>36</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican Archives, <ref target='Pg095'>95</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Vatican Council, <ref target='Pg068'>68</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg090'>90</ref>, <ref target='Pg103'>103</ref>, <ref target='Pg106'>106</ref>, <ref target='Pg109'>109</ref>, <ref target='Pg130'>130</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vaudin</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vierort, K. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>View of life, Christian, <ref target='Pg252'>252</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; of the World, anthropocentric, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; Christian, <ref target='Pg014'>14</ref>, <ref target='Pg027'>27</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; humanitarian, <ref target='Pg018'>18</ref>, <ref target='Pg021'>21</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg031'>31</ref></l>
<l>&mdash;&mdash; &mdash;&mdash; theocentric, <ref target='Pg019'>19</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l>Views of the World, various, <ref target='Pg013'>13</ref>, <ref target='Pg022'>22</ref>, <ref target='Pg159'>159</ref>, <ref target='Pg294'>294</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vigilius, St.</hi>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vincent, St. of Lerin</hi>, <ref target='Pg383'>383</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Virchow, R. von</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref>, <ref target='Pg241'>241</ref>, <ref target='Pg323'>323</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vogt, K.</hi>, <ref target='Pg030'>30</ref>, <ref target='Pg115'>115</ref>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Volkmann, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Volta, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg212'>212</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi>, <ref target='Pg224'>224</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Voltaire</hi>, <ref target='Pg028'>28</ref>, <ref target='Pg326'>326</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Vries, H. de</hi>, <ref target='Pg220'>220</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Waagen, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wahrmund, L.</hi>, <ref target='Pg086'>86</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wallace, A.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Walsh, J. J.</hi>, <ref target='Pg208'>208</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Walther, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg284'>284</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Washington, George</hi>, <ref target='Pg349'>349</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wasmann, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref>, <ref target='Pg223'>223</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg249'>249</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wehner, von</hi>, <ref target='Pg405'>405</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Weismann</hi>, <ref target='Pg242'>242</ref></l>
</lg>

<pb n='419'/><anchor id='Pg419'/>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Weizsäcker</hi>, <ref target='Pg257'>257</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Westermark</hi>, <ref target='Pg050'>50</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Westhoff</hi>, <ref target='Pg177'>177</ref>, <ref target='Pg074'>74</ref>, <ref target='Pg145'>145</ref>, <ref target='Pg276'>276</ref>, <ref target='Pg282'>282</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wimpheling</hi>, <ref target='Pg156'>156</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wobbermin, G.</hi>, <ref target='Pg245'>245</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wolf, R.</hi>, <ref target='Pg207'>207</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wöllner, Minister</hi>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Wundt, W.</hi>, <ref target='Pg024'>24</ref>, <ref target='Pg052'>52</ref>, <ref target='Pg062'>62</ref>, <ref target='Pg071'>71</ref>, <ref target='Pg137'>137</ref>, <ref target='Pg235'>235</ref>, <ref target='Pg243'>243</ref>, <ref target='Pg254'>254</ref>, <ref target='Pg288'>288</ref>, <ref target='Pg290'>290</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Young, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg119'>119</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zacharias, Pope</hi>, <ref target='Pg180'>180</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zedlitz, von</hi>, <ref target='Pg363'>363</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zeller, E.</hi>, <ref target='Pg246'>246</ref>, <ref target='Pg255'>255</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Ziegler, Th.</hi>, <ref target='Pg059'>59</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zittel</hi>, <ref target='Pg116'>116</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zöckler</hi>, <ref target='Pg007'>7</ref>, <ref target='Pg181'>181</ref>, <ref target='Pg201'>201</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zoen, Bishop</hi>, <ref target='Pg151'>151</ref></l>
</lg>

<lg>
<l><hi rend='italic'>Zola</hi>, <ref target='Pg248'>248</ref> <hi rend='italic'>et seq.</hi></l>
</lg>

</div>

</body>
<back rend="page-break-before: right">
  <div id="footnotes">
    <index index="toc" />
    <index index="pdf" />
    <head>Footnotes</head>
    <divGen type="footnotes"/>
  </div>
  <div rend="page-break-before: right">
    <divGen type="pgfooter" />
  </div>
</back>
</text>
</TEI.2>
